The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Gutenberg Webster's Unabridged Dictionary: Section S
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Gutenberg Webster's Unabridged Dictionary: Section S

Author: Project Gutenberg
        Noah Webster

Release date: September 1, 1996 [eBook #668]
                Most recently updated: November 2, 2024

Language: English



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GUTENBERG WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY: SECTION S ***
Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary

Version published 1913

by the C. & G. Merriam Co.
Springfield, Mass.
Under the direction of
Noah Porter, D.D., LL.D.




S.

S (s), the nineteenth letter of the English alphabet, is a consonant,
and is often called a sibilant, in allusion to its hissing sound. It
has two principal sounds; one a mere hissing, as in sack, this; the
other a vocal hissing (the same as that of z), as in is, wise. Besides
these it sometimes has the sounds of sh and zh, as in sure, measure. It
generally has its hissing sound at the beginning of words, but in the
middle and at the end of words its sound is determined by usage. In a
few words it is silent, as in isle, débris. With the letter h it forms
the digraph sh. See Guide to pronunciation, §§ 255-261.

Both the form and the name of the letter S are derived from the Latin,
which got the letter through the Greek from the Phœnician. The ultimate
origin is Egyptian. S is etymologically most nearly related to c, z, t,
and r; as, in ice, OE. is; E. hence, OE. hennes; E. rase, raze; erase,
razor; that, G. das; E. reason, F. raison, L. ratio; E. was, were;
chair, chaise (see C, Z, T, and R.).

-s. 1. [OE. es, AS. as.] The suffix used to form the plural of most
words; as in roads, elfs, sides, accounts.

2. [OE. -s, for older -th, AS. - ð.] The suffix used to form the third
person singular indicative of English verbs; as in falls, tells, sends.

3. An adverbial suffix; as in towards, needs, always, -- originally the
genitive, possesive, ending. See -'s.

-'s [OE. -es, AS. -es.] The suffix used to form the possessive singular
of nouns; as, boy's; man's.

's. A contraction for is or (colloquially) for has. "My heart's
subdued." Shak.

Sa"adh (sä"d), n. See Sadh.

Saan (sän), n. pl. (Ethnol.) Same as Bushmen.

Sab`a*dil"la (sb`*dl"l), n. [Sp. cebadilla.] (Bot.) A Mexican
liliaceous plant (Schœnocaulon officinale); also, its seeds, which
contain the alkaloid veratrine. It was formerly used in medicine as an
emetic and purgative.

Sa*bæ"an (?), a. & n. Same as Sabian.

Sa*bæ"an*ism (?), n. Same as Sabianism.

{ Sa"bæ*ism (?), Sa"ba*ism (?) }, n. See Sabianism.

Sa"bal (?), n. (Bot.) A genus of palm trees including the palmetto of
the Southern United States.

Sab"a*oth (sb"*th or s"b*th; 277), n. pl. [Heb. tseb'th, pl. of tsb',
an army or host, fr. tsb', to go forth to war.] 1. Armies; hosts. [Used
twice in the English Bible, in the phrase "The Lord of Sabaoth."]

2. Incorrectly, the Sabbath.

Sab"bat (?), n. [See Sabbath.] In mediæval demonology, the nocturnal
assembly in which demons and sorcerers were thought to celebrate their
orgies.

Sab`ba*ta"ri*an (?), n. [L. Sabbatarius: cf. F. sabbataire. See
Sabbath.] 1. One who regards and keeps the seventh day of the week as
holy, agreeably to the letter of the fourth commandment in the
Decalogue.

There were Christians in the early church who held this opinion, and
certain Christians, esp. the Seventh-day Baptists, hold it now.

2. A strict observer of the Sabbath.

Sab`ba*ta"ri*an, a. Of or pertaining to the Sabbath, or the tenets of
Sabbatarians.

Sab`ba*ta"ri*an*ism (?), n. The tenets of Sabbatarians. Bp. Ward
(1673).

Sab"bath (?), n. [OE. sabat, sabbat, F. sabbat, L. sabbatum, Gr.
sa`bbaton, fr. Heb. shabbth, fr. shbath to rest from labor. Cf.
Sabbat.] 1. A season or day of rest; one day in seven appointed for
rest or worship, the observance of which was enjoined upon the Jews in
the Decalogue, and has been continued by the Christian church with a
transference of the day observed from the last to the first day of the
week, which is called also Lord's Day.

    Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.


Ex. xx. 8.

2. The seventh year, observed among the Israelites as one of rest and
festival. Lev. xxv. 4.

3. Fig.: A time of rest or repose; intermission of pain, effort,
sorrow, or the like.

    Peaceful sleep out the sabbath of the tomb.


Pope.

Sabbath breaker, one who violates the law of the Sabbath. -- Sabbath
breaking, the violation of the law of the Sabbath. -- Sabbath-day's
journey, a distance of about a mile, which, under Rabbinical law, the
Jews were allowed to travel on the Sabbath.

Syn. -- Sabbath, Sunday. Sabbath is not strictly synonymous with
Sunday. Sabbath denotes the institution; Sunday is the name of the
first day of the week. The Sabbath of the Jews is on Saturday, and the
Sabbath of most Christians on Sunday. In New England, the first day of
the week has been called "the Sabbath," to mark it as holy time; Sunday
is the word more commonly used, at present, in all parts of the United
States, as it is in England. "So if we will be the children of our
heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep the Christian Sabbath day,
which is the Sunday." Homilies.

Sab"bath*less, a. Without Sabbath, or intermission of labor; hence,
without respite or rest. Bacon.

{ Sab*bat"ic (?), Sab*bat"ic*al (?) }, a. [Gr. &?;: cf. F. sabbatique.]
Of or pertaining to the Sabbath; resembling the Sabbath; enjoying or
bringing an intermission of labor.

Sabbatical year (Jewish Antiq.), every seventh year, in which the
Israelites were commanded to suffer their fields and vineyards to rest,
or lie without tillage.

Sab"ba*tism (?), n. [L. sabbatismus, Gr. &?;, fr. &?; to keep the
Sabbath: cf. F. sabbatisme. See Sabbath.] Intermission of labor, as
upon the Sabbath; rest. Dr. H. More.

Sab"ba*ton (?), n. [Cf. Sp. zapaton, a large shoe, F. sabot a wooden
shoe.] A round-toed, armed covering for the feet, worn during a part of
the sixteenth century in both military and civil dress.

Sa*be"an (?), a. & n. Same as Sabian.

Sa"be*ism (?), n. Same as Sabianism.

||Sa*bel"la (?), n. [NL., fr. L. sabulum gravel.] (Zoöl.) A genus of
||tubicolous annelids having a circle of plumose gills around the head.

Sa*bel"li*an (?), a. Pertaining to the doctrines or tenets of
Sabellius. See Sabellian, n.

Sa*bel"li*an (?), n. (Eccl. Hist.) A follower of Sabellius, a presbyter
of Ptolemais in the third century, who maintained that there is but one
person in the Godhead, and that the Son and Holy Spirit are only
different powers, operations, or offices of the one God the Father.

Sa*bel"li*an*ism (?), n. (Eccl.) The doctrines or tenets of Sabellius.
See Sabellian, n.

Sa*bel"loid (?), a. [Sabella + -oid.] (Zoöl.) Like, or related to, the
genus Sabella. -- Sa*bel"loid, n.

{ Sa"ber, Sa"bre } (?), n. [F. sabre, G. säbel; of uncertain origin;
cf. Hung. száblya, Pol. szabla, Russ. sabla, and L. Gr. zabo`s crooked,
curved.] A sword with a broad and heavy blade, thick at the back, and
usually more or less curved like a scimiter; a cavalry sword.

Saber fish, or Sabre fish (Zoöl.), the cutlass fish.

{ Sa"ber, Sa"bre }, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sabered (?) or Sabred (&?;); p.
pr. & vb. n. Sabering or Sabring (&?;).] [Cf. F. sabrer.] To strike,
cut, or kill with a saber; to cut down, as with a saber.

    You send troops to saber and bayonet us into submission.


Burke.

{ Sa"ber*bill`, Sa"bre*bill` }, n. (Zoöl.) The curlew.

Sa"bi*an (?), a. [L. Sabaeus.] [Written also Sabean, and Sabæan.] 1. Of
or pertaining to Saba in Arabia, celebrated for producing aromatic
plants.

2. Relating to the religion of Saba, or to the worship of the heavenly
bodies.

Sa"bi*an, n. An adherent of the Sabian religion; a worshiper of the
heavenly bodies. [Written also Sabæan, and Sabean.]

Sa"bi*an*ism (?), n. The doctrine of the Sabians; the Sabian religion;
that species of idolatry which consists in worshiping the sun, moon,
and stars; heliolatry. [Written also Sabæanism.]

||Sab"i*cu (?), n. The very hard wood of a leguminous West Indian tree
||(Lysiloma Sabicu), valued for shipbuilding.

Sa"bine (?), a. [L. Sabinus.] Of or pertaining to the ancient Sabines,
a people of Italy. -- n. One of the Sabine people.

Sab"ine (?), n. [F., fr. L. Sabina herba, fr. Sabini the Sabines. Cf.
Savin.] (Bot.) See Savin.

Sa"ble (?), n. [OF. sable, F. zibeline sable (in sense 4), LL.
sabellum; cf. D. sabel, Dan. sabel, zobel, Sw. sabel, sobel, G. zobel;
all fr. Russ. sóbole.] 1. (Zoöl.) A carnivorous animal of the Weasel
family (Mustela zibellina) native of the northern latitudes of Europe,
Asia, and America, -- noted for its fine, soft, and valuable fur.

The sable resembles the marten, but has a longer head and ears. Its fur
consists of a soft under wool, with a dense coat of hair, overtopped by
another still longer. It varies greatly in color and quality according
to the locality and the season of the year. The darkest and most
valuable furs are taken in autumn and winter in the colder parts of
Siberia, Russia, and British North America.

The American sable, or marten, was formerly considered a distinct
species (Mustela Americana), but it differs very little from the
Asiatic sable, and is now considered only a geographical variety.

2. The fur of the sable.

3. A mourning garment; a funeral robe; -- generally in the plural.
"Sables wove by destiny." Young.

4. (Her.) The tincture black; -- represented by vertical and horizontal
lines crossing each other.

Sa"ble (?), a. Of the color of the sable's fur; dark; black; -- used
chiefly in poetry.

    Night, sable goddess! from her ebon throne, In rayless majesty, now
    stretches forth Her leaden scepter o'er a slumbering world.


Young.

Sable antelope (Zoöl.), a large South African antelope (Hippotragus
niger). Both sexes have long, sharp horns. The adult male is black; the
female is dark chestnut above, white beneath. -- Sable iron, a superior
quality of Russia iron; -- so called because originally stamped with
the figure of a sable. -- Sable mouse (Zoöl.), the lemming.

Sa"ble, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sabled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sabling (?).]
To render sable or dark; to drape darkly or in black.

    Sabled all in black the shady sky.


G. Fletcher.

||Sa`bot" (s`b"), n. [F.] 1. A kind of wooden shoe worn by the
||peasantry in France, Belgium, Sweden, and some other European
||countries.

2. (Mil.) A thick, circular disk of wood, to which the cartridge bag
and projectile are attached, in fixed ammunition for cannon; also, a
piece of soft metal attached to a projectile to take the groove of the
rifling.

||Sa`bo"tière (?), n. [F.] A kind of freezer for ices.

Sa"bre (?), n. & v. See Saber.

||Sa"bre*tasche` (?), n. [F. sabretache, G. säbeltasche; säbel saber +
||tasche a pocket.] (Mil.) A leather case or pocket worn by cavalry at
||the left side, suspended from the sword belt. Campbell (Dict. Mil.
||Sci.).

Sa*bri"na work` (?). A variety of appliqué work for quilts, table
covers, etc. Caulfeild & S. (Dict. of Needlework).

Sab"u*lose (?), a. [L. sabulosus, from sabulum, sabulo, sand.] (Bot.)
Growing in sandy places.

Sab`u*los"i*ty (?), n. The quality of being sabulous; sandiness;
grittiness.

Sab"u*lous (?), a. [L. sabulosus.] Sandy; gritty.

Sac (sk), n. (Ethnol.) See Sacs.

Sac, n. [See Sake, Soc.] (O.Eng. Law) The privilege formerly enjoyed by
the lord of a manor, of holding courts, trying causes, and imposing
fines. Cowell.

Sac (sk), n. [F., fr. L. saccus a sack. See Sack a bag.] 1. See 2d
Sack.

2. (Biol.) A cavity, bag, or receptacle, usually containing fluid, and
either closed, or opening into another cavity to the exterior; a sack.

Sac"a*lait (?), n. (Zoöl.) A kind of fresh-water bass; the crappie.
[Southern U.S.]

Sa"car (?), n. See Saker.

Sac*cade" (?), n. [F.] (Man.) A sudden, violent check of a horse by
drawing or twitching the reins on a sudden and with one pull.

Sac"cate (?), a. [NL. saccatus, fr. L. saccus a sack, bag.] 1. (Biol.)
Having the form of a sack or pouch; furnished with a sack or pouch, as
a petal.

2. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Saccata, a suborder of ctenophores
having two pouches into which the long tentacles can be retracted.

Sac"cha*rate (?), n. (Chem.) (a) A salt of saccharic acid. (b) In a
wider sense, a compound of saccharose, or any similar carbohydrate,
with such bases as the oxides of calcium, barium, or lead; a sucrate.

Sac*char"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or obtained from,
saccharine substances; specifically, designating an acid obtained, as a
white amorphous gummy mass, by the oxidation of mannite, glucose,
sucrose, etc.

Sac`cha*rif"er*ous (?), a. [L. saccharon sugar + -ferous.] Producing
sugar; as, sacchariferous canes.

Sac*char"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saccharified (?); p. pr. & vb.
n. Saccharifying (?).] [L. saccharon sugar + -fy: cf. F. saccharifier.]
To convert into, or to impregnate with, sugar.

Sac`cha*ril"la (?), n. A kind of muslin.

Sac`cha*rim"e*ter (?), n. [L. saccharon sugar + -meter: cf. F.
saccharimètre.] An instrument for ascertaining the quantity of
saccharine matter in any solution, as the juice of a plant, or brewers'
and distillers' worts. [Written also saccharometer.]

The common saccharimeter of the brewer is an hydrometer adapted by its
scale to point out the proportion of saccharine matter in a solution of
any specific gravity. The polarizing saccharimeter of the chemist is a
complex optical apparatus, in which polarized light is transmitted
through the saccharine solution, and the proportion of sugar indicated
by the relative deviation of the plane of polarization.

Sac`cha*ri*met"ric*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to saccharimetry;
obtained by saccharimetry.


Sac`cha*rim"e*try (sk`k*rm"*tr), n. The act, process or method of
determining the amount and kind of sugar present in sirup, molasses,
and the like, especially by the employment of polarizing apparatus.

Sac"cha*rin (sk"k*rn), n. [F., from L. saccharon sugar.] (Chem.) A
bitter white crystalline substance obtained from the saccharinates and
regarded as the lactone of saccharinic acid; -- so called because
formerly supposed to be isomeric with cane sugar (saccharose).

Sac"cha*ri*nate (?), n. (Chem.) (a) A salt of saccharinic acid. (b) A
salt of saccharine.

Sac"cha*rine (? or ?), a. [F. saccharin, fr. L. saccharon sugar, Gr.
&?;, &?;, &?;, Skr. çarkara. Cf. Sugar.] Of or pertaining to sugar;
having the qualities of sugar; producing sugar; sweet; as, a saccharine
taste; saccharine matter.

Sac"cha*rine (? or ?), n. (Chem.) A trade name for benzoic sulphinide.
[Written also saccharin.]

Sac"cha*rin"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or derived from,
saccharin; specifically, designating a complex acid not known in the
free state but well known in its salts, which are obtained by boiling
dextrose and levulose (invert sugar) with milk of lime.

Sac"cha*rize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saccharized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Saccharizing (?).] To convert into, or to impregnate with, sugar.

{ Sac"cha*roid (?), Sac`cha*roid"al (?) }, a. [L. saccharon sugar +
-oid: cf. F. saccharoïde.] Resembling sugar, as in taste, appearance,
consistency, or composition; as, saccharoidal limestone.

Sac`cha*rom"e*ter (?), n. A saccharimeter.

||Sac`cha*ro*my"ces (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; sugar + &?;, &?;, a
||fungus.] (Biol.) A genus of budding fungi, the various species of
||which have the power, to a greater or less extent, or splitting up
||sugar into alcohol and carbonic acid. They are the active agents in
||producing fermentation of wine, beer, etc. Saccharomyces cerevisiæ is
||the yeast of sedimentary beer. Also called Torula.

||Sac`cha*ro*my*ce"tes (?), n. pl. (Biol.) A family of fungi consisting
||of the one genus Saccharomyces.

Sac"cha*ro*nate (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of saccharonic acid.

Sac"cha*rone (?), n. [Saccharin + lactone.] (Chem.) (a) A white
crystalline substance, C6H8O6, obtained by the oxidation of saccharin,
and regarded as the lactone of saccharonic acid. (b) An oily liquid,
C6H10O2, obtained by the reduction of saccharin.

Sac`cha*ron"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or derived from,
saccharone; specifically, designating an unstable acid which is
obtained from saccharone (a) by hydration, and forms a well-known
series of salts.

Sac"cha*rose` (?), n. (Chem.) Cane sugar; sucrose; also, in general,
any one of the group of which saccharose, or sucrose proper, is the
type. See Sucrose.

Sac"cha*rous (?), a. Saccharine.

||Sac"cha*rum (?), n. [NL. See Saccharine.] (Bot.) A genus of tall
||tropical grasses including the sugar cane.

Sac`cho*lac"tate (?), n. [See Saccholactic.] (Chem.) A salt of
saccholactic acid; -- formerly called also saccholate. [Obs.] See
Mucate.

Sac`cho*lac"tic (?), a. [L. saccharon sugar + lac, lactis, milk.]
(Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or designating, an acid now called mucic
acid; saccholic. [Obs.]

Sac*chol"ic (?), a. Saccholactic. [Obs.]

Sac*chul"mate (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of sacchulmic acid.

Sac*chul"mic (?), a. [Saccharine + ulmic.] (Chem.) Of, pertaining to,
or designating, an acid obtained as a dark amorphous substance by the
long-continued boiling of sucrose with very dilute sulphuric acid. It
resembles humic acid. [Written also sacculmic.]

Sac*chul"min (?), n. (Chem.) An amorphous huminlike substance
resembling sacchulmic acid, and produced together with it.

Sac*cif"er*ous (?), a. [L. saccus a sack + -ferous.] (Biol.) Bearing a
sac.

Sac"ci*form (?), a. [L. saccus a sack + -form.] (Biol.) Having the
general form of a sac.

||Sac`co*glos"sa (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. L. saccus a sack + Gr. &?; a
||tongue.] (Zoöl.) Same as Pellibranchiata.

Sac"cu*lar (?), a. Like a sac; sacciform.

Sac"cu*la`ted (?), a. Furnished with little sacs.

Sac"cule (?), n. [L. sacculus, dim. of saccus sack.] A little sac;
specifically, the sacculus of the ear.

Sac`cu*lo-coch"le*ar (?), a. (Anat.) Pertaining to the sacculus and
cochlea of the ear.

Sac`cu*lo-u*tric"u*lar (?), a. (Anat.) Pertaining to the sacculus and
utriculus of the ear.

||Sac"cu*lus (?), n.; pl. Sacculi (#). [L., little sack.] (Anat.) A
||little sac; esp., a part of the membranous labyrinth of the ear. See
||the Note under Ear.

||Sac"cus (?), n.; pl. Sacci (#). [L., a sack.] (Biol.) A sac.

Sa*cel"lum (?), n.; pl. Sacella (#). [L., dim. of sacrum a sacred
place.] (a) (Rom. Antiq.) An unroofed space consecrated to a divinity.
(b) (Eccl.) A small monumental chapel in a church. Shipley.

Sac`er*do"tal (?), a. [L. sacerdotalis, fr. sacerdos, -otis, a priest,
fr. sacer holy, sacred: cf. F. sacerdotal.] Of or pertaining to
priests, or to the order of priests; relating to the priesthood;
priesty; as, sacerdotal dignity; sacerdotal functions.

    The ascendency of the sacerdotal order was long the ascendency
    which naturally and properly belongs to intellectual superiority.


Macaulay.

Sac`er*do"tal*ism (?), n. The system, style, spirit, or character, of a
priesthood, or sacerdotal order; devotion to the interests of the
sacerdotal order.

Sac`er*do"tal*ly, adv. In a sacerdotal manner.

Sach"el (sch"l), n. A small bag. See Satchel.

Sa"chem (s&acr";chem), n. A chief of a tribe of the American Indians; a
sagamore. See Sagamore.

Sa"chem*dom (-dm), n. The government or jurisdiction of a sachem. Dr.
T. Dwight.

Sa"chem*ship, n. Office or condition of a sachem.

||Sa`chet" (?), n. [F., dim. of sac. See Sac.] A scent bag, or perfume
||cushion, to be laid among handkerchiefs, garments, etc., to perfume
||them.

Sa*ci"e*ty (?), n. Satiety. [Obs.] Bacon.

Sack (sk), n. [OE. seck, F. sec dry (cf. Sp. seco, It. secco), from L.
siccus dry, harsh; perhaps akin to Gr. 'ischno`s, Skr. sikata sand, Ir.
sesc dry, W. hysp. Cf. Desiccate.] A name formerly given to various dry
Spanish wines. "Sherris sack." Shak.

Sack posset, a posset made of sack, and some other ingredients.

Sack, n. [OE. sak, sek, AS. sacc, sæcc, L. saccus, Gr. sa`kkos from
Heb. sak; cf. F. sac, from the Latin. Cf. Sac, Satchel, Sack to
plunder.] 1. A bag for holding and carrying goods of any kind; a
receptacle made of some kind of pliable material, as cloth, leather,
and the like; a large pouch.

2. A measure of varying capacity, according to local usage and the
substance. The American sack of salt is 215 pounds; the sack of wheat,
two bushels. McElrath.

3. [Perhaps a different word.] Originally, a loosely hanging garment
for women, worn like a cloak about the shoulders, and serving as a
decorative appendage to the gown; now, an outer garment with sleeves,
worn by women; as, a dressing sack. [Written also sacque.]

4. A sack coat; a kind of coat worn by men, and extending from top to
bottom without a cross seam.

5. (Biol.) See 2d Sac, 2.

Sack bearer (Zoöl.). See Basket worm, under Basket. -- Sack tree
(Bot.), an East Indian tree (Antiaris saccidora) which is cut into
lengths, and made into sacks by turning the bark inside out, and
leaving a slice of the wood for a bottom. -- To give the sack to or get
the sack, to discharge, or be discharged, from employment; to jilt, or
be jilted. [Slang]

Sack, v. t. 1. To put in a sack; to bag; as, to sack corn.

    Bolsters sacked in cloth, blue and crimson.


L. Wallace.

2. To bear or carry in a sack upon the back or the shoulders. [Colloq.]

Sack, n. [F. sac plunder, pillage, originally, a pack, packet, booty
packed up, fr. L. saccus. See Sack a bag.] The pillage or plunder, as
of a town or city; the storm and plunder of a town; devastation;
ravage.

    The town was stormed, and delivered up to sack, -- by which phrase
    is to be understood the perpetration of all those outrages which
    the ruthless code of war allowed, in that age, on the persons and
    property of the defenseless inhabitants, without regard to sex or
    age.


Prescott.

Sack, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sacked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sacking.] [See
Sack pillage.] To plunder or pillage, as a town or city; to devastate;
to ravage.

    The Romans lay under the apprehensions of seeing their city sacked
    by a barbarous enemy.


Addison.

Sack"age (?; 48), n. The act of taking by storm and pillaging; sack.
[R.] H. Roscoe.

Sack"but (?), n. [F. saquebute, OF. saqueboute a sackbut, earlier, a
sort of hook attached to the end of a lance used by foot soldiers to
unhorse cavalrymen; prop. meaning, pull and push; fr. saquier, sachier,
to pull, draw (perhaps originally, to put into a bag or take out from a
bag; see Sack a bag) + bouter to push (see Butt to thrust). The name
was given to the musical instrument from its being lengthened and
shortened.] (Mus.) A brass wind instrument, like a bass trumpet, so
contrived that it can be lengthened or shortened according to the tone
required; -- said to be the same as the trombone. [Written also
sagbut.] Moore (Encyc. of Music).

The sackbut of the Scriptures is supposed to have been a stringed
instrument.

Sack"cloth` (?; 115), n. Linen or cotton cloth such as sacks are made
of; coarse cloth; anciently, a cloth or garment worn in mourning,
distress, mortification, or penitence.

    Gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner.


2 Sam. iii. 31.

    Thus with sackcloth I invest my woe.


Sandys.

Sack"clothed` (?), a. Clothed in sackcloth.

Sack"er (?), n. One who sacks; one who takes part in the storm and
pillage of a town.

Sack"ful (?), n.; pl. Sackfuls (&?;). As much as a sack will hold.

Sack"ful, a. Bent on plunder. [Obs.] Chapman.

Sack"ing, n. [AS. sæccing, from sæcc sack, bag.] Stout, coarse cloth of
which sacks, bags, etc., are made.

Sack"less, a. [AS. sacleás; sacu contention + leás loose, free from.]
Quiet; peaceable; harmless; innocent. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Sack"-winged` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a peculiar pouch developed near
the front edge of the wing; -- said of certain bats of the genus
Saccopteryx.

Sacque (?), n. [Formed after the analogy of the French. See 2d Sack.]
Same as 2d Sack, 3.

Sa"cral (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sacrum; in the region
of the sacrum.

Sac"ra*ment (?), n. [L. sacramentum an oath, a sacred thing, a mystery,
a sacrament, fr. sacrare to declare as sacred, sacer sacred: cf. F.
sacrement. See Sacred.] 1. The oath of allegiance taken by Roman
soldiers; hence, a sacred ceremony used to impress an obligation; a
solemn oath-taking; an oath. [Obs.]

    I'll take the sacrament on't.


Shak.

2. The pledge or token of an oath or solemn covenant; a sacred thing; a
mystery. [Obs.]

    God sometimes sent a light of fire, and pillar of a cloud . . . and
    the sacrament of a rainbow, to guide his people through their
    portion of sorrows.


Jer. Taylor.

3. (Theol.) One of the solemn religious ordinances enjoined by Christ,
the head of the Christian church, to be observed by his followers;
hence, specifically, the eucharist; the Lord's Supper.

Syn. -- Sacrament, Eucharist. -- Protestants apply the term sacrament
to baptism and the Lord's Supper, especially the latter. The R. Cath.
and Greek churches have five other sacraments, viz., confirmation,
penance, holy orders, matrimony, and extreme unction. As sacrament
denotes an oath or vow, the word has been applied by way of emphasis to
the Lord's Supper, where the most sacred vows are renewed by the
Christian in commemorating the death of his Redeemer. Eucharist denotes
the giving of thanks; and this term also has been applied to the same
ordinance, as expressing the grateful remembrance of Christ's
sufferings and death. "Some receive the sacrament as a means to procure
great graces and blessings; others as an eucharist and an office of
thanksgiving for what they have received." Jer. Taylor.

Sac"ra*ment (?), v. t. To bind by an oath. [Obs.] Laud.

Sac`ra*men"tal (?), a. [L. sacramentalis: cf. F. sacramental,
sacramentel.] 1. Of or pertaining to a sacrament or the sacraments; of
the nature of a sacrament; sacredly or solemnly binding; as,
sacramental rites or elements.

2. Bound by a sacrament.

    The sacramental host of God's elect.


Cowper.

Sac`ra*men"tal, n. That which relates to a sacrament. Bp. Morton.

Sac`ra*men"tal*ism (?), n. The doctrine and use of sacraments;
attachment of excessive importance to sacraments.

Sac`ra*men"tal*ist, n. One who holds the doctrine of the real objective
presence of Christ's body and blood in the holy eucharist. Shipley.

Sac`ra*men"tal*ly, adv. In a sacramental manner.

Sac`ra*men*ta"ri*an (?), n. [LL. sacramentarius: cf. F. sacramentaire.]
1. (Eccl.) A name given in the sixteenth century to those German
reformers who rejected both the Roman and the Lutheran doctrine of the
holy eucharist.

2. One who holds extreme opinions regarding the efficacy of sacraments.

Sac`ra*men*ta"ri*an, a. 1. Of or pertaining a sacrament, or to the
sacramentals; sacramental.

2. Of or pertaining to the Sacramentarians.

Sac`ra*men"ta*ry (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a sacrament or the
sacraments; sacramental.

2. Of or pertaining to the Sacramentarians.

Sac`ra*men"ta*ry, n.; pl. -ries (#). [LL. sacramentarium: cf. F.
sacramentaire.] 1. An ancient book of the Roman Catholic Church,
written by Pope Gelasius, and revised, corrected, and abridged by St.
Gregory, in which were contained the rites for Mass, the sacraments,
the dedication of churches, and other ceremonies. There are several
ancient books of the same kind in France and Germany.

2. Same as Sacramentarian, n., 1.

    Papists, Anabaptists, and Sacramentaries.


Jer. Taylor.

Sac"ra*ment*ize (?), v. i. To administer the sacraments. [R.]

    Both to preach and sacramentize.


Fuller.

||Sa*cra"ri*um (?), n.; pl. -ria (#). [L., fr. sacer sacred.] 1. A sort
||of family chapel in the houses of the Romans, devoted to a special
||divinity.

2. The adytum of a temple. Gwilt.

3. In a Christian church, the sanctuary.

Sa"crate (?), v. t. [L. sacratus, p. p. of sacrare. See Sacred.] To
consecrate. [Obs.]

Sa*cra"tion (?), n. Consecration. [Obs.]

Sa"cre (?), n. See Saker.

Sa"cre, v. t. [F. sacrer. See Sacred.] To consecrate; to make sacred.
[Obs.] Holland.

Sa"cred (?), a. [Originally p. p. of OE. sacren to consecrate, F.
sacrer, fr. L. sacrare, fr. sacer sacred, holy, cursed. Cf. Consecrate,
Execrate, Saint, Sexton.] 1. Set apart by solemn religious ceremony;
especially, in a good sense, made holy; set apart to religious use;
consecrated; not profane or common; as, a sacred place; a sacred day;
sacred service.

2. Relating to religion, or to the services of religion; not secular;
religious; as, sacred history.

    Smit with the love of sacred song.


Milton.

3. Designated or exalted by a divine sanction; possessing the highest
title to obedience, honor, reverence, or veneration; entitled to
extreme reverence; venerable.

    Such neighbor nearness to our sacred [royal] blood Should nothing
    privilege him.


Shak.

    Poet and saint to thee alone were given, The two most sacred names
    of earth and heaven.


Cowley.

4. Hence, not to be profaned or violated; inviolable.

    Secrets of marriage still are sacred held.


Dryden.

5. Consecrated; dedicated; devoted; -- with to.

    A temple, sacred to the queen of love.


Dryden.

6. Solemnly devoted, in a bad sense, as to evil, vengeance, curse, or
the like; accursed; baleful. [Archaic]

    But, to destruction sacred and devote.


Milton.


Society of the Sacred Heart (R.C. Ch.), a religious order of women,
founded in France in 1800, and approved in 1826. It was introduced into
America in 1817. The members of the order devote themselves to the
higher branches of female education. -- Sacred baboon. (Zoöl.) See
Hamadryas. -- Sacred bean (Bot.), a seed of the Oriental lotus (Nelumbo
speciosa or Nelumbium speciosum), a plant resembling a water lily;
also, the plant itself. See Lotus. -- Sacred beetle (Zoöl.) See Scarab.
-- Sacred canon. See Canon, n., 3. - - Sacred fish (Zoöl.), any one of
numerous species of fresh-water African fishes of the family Mormyridæ.
Several large species inhabit the Nile and were considered sacred by
the ancient Egyptians; especially Mormyrus oxyrhynchus. -- Sacred ibis.
See Ibis. -- Sacred monkey. (Zoöl.) (a) Any Asiatic monkey of the genus
Semnopithecus, regarded as sacred by the Hindoos; especially, the
entellus. See Entellus. (b) The sacred baboon. See Hamadryas. (c) The
bhunder, or rhesus monkey. -- Sacred place (Civil Law), the place where
a deceased person is buried.

Syn. -- Holy; divine; hallowed; consecrated; dedicated; devoted;
religious; venerable; reverend.

-- Sa"cred*ly (#), adv. -- Sa"cred*ness, n.

{ Sacrif"ic (?), Sa*crif"ic*al (?) }, a. [L. sacrificus, sacrificalis.
See Sacrifice.] Employed in sacrifice. [R.] Johnson.

Sa*crif"ic*a*ble (?), a. Capable of being offered in sacrifice. [R.]
Sir T. Browne.

Sa*crif"ic*ant (?), n. [L. sacrificans, p. pr. See Sacrifice.] One who
offers a sacrifice. [R.]

Sac"ri*fi*ca`tor (?), n. [L.] A sacrificer; one who offers a sacrifice.
[R.] Sir T. Browne.

Sa*crif"ic*a*to*ry (?), n. [Cf. F. sacrificatoire.] Offering sacrifice.
[R.] Sherwood.

Sac"ri*fice (?; 277), n. [OE. sacrifise, sacrifice, F. sacrifice, fr.
L. sacrificium; sacer sacred + facere to make. See Sacred, and Fact.]
1. The offering of anything to God, or to a god; consecratory rite.

    Great pomp, and sacrifice, and praises loud, To Dagon.


Milton.

2. Anything consecrated and offered to God, or to a divinity; an
immolated victim, or an offering of any kind, laid upon an altar, or
otherwise presented in the way of religious thanksgiving, atonement, or
conciliation.

    Moloch, horrid king, besmeared with blood Of human sacrifice.


Milton.

    My life, if thou preserv'st my life, Thy sacrifice shall be.


Addison.

3. Destruction or surrender of anything for the sake of something else;
devotion of some desirable object in behalf of a higher object, or to a
claim deemed more pressing; hence, also, the thing so devoted or given
up; as, the sacrifice of interest to pleasure, or of pleasure to
interest.

4. A sale at a price less than the cost or the actual value.
[Tradesmen's Cant]

Burnt sacrifice. See Burnt offering, under Burnt. -- Sacrifice hit
(Baseball), in batting, a hit of such a kind that the batter loses his
chance of tallying, but enables one or more who are on bases to get
home or gain a base.

Sac"ri*fice (?; 277), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sacrificed (&?;); p. pr. &
vb. n. Sacrificing (&?;).] [From Sacrifice, n.: cf. F. sacrifier, L.
sacrificare; sacer sacred, holy + -ficare (only in comp.) to make. See
-fy.] 1. To make an offering of; to consecrate or present to a divinity
by way of expiation or propitiation, or as a token acknowledgment or
thanksgiving; to immolate on the altar of God, in order to atone for
sin, to procure favor, or to express thankfulness; as, to sacrifice an
ox or a sheep.

    Oft sacrificing bullock, lamb, or kid.


Milton.

2. Hence, to destroy, surrender, or suffer to be lost, for the sake of
obtaining something; to give up in favor of a higher or more imperative
object or duty; to devote, with loss or suffering.

    Condemned to sacrifice his childish years To babbling ignorance,
    and to empty fears.


Prior.

    The Baronet had sacrificed a large sum . . . for the sake of . . .
    making this boy his heir.


G. Eliot.

3. To destroy; to kill. Johnson.

4. To sell at a price less than the cost or the actual value.
[Tradesmen's Cant]

Sac"ri*fice, v. i. To make offerings to God, or to a deity, of things
consumed on the altar; to offer sacrifice.

    O teacher, some great mischief hath befallen To that meek man, who
    well had sacrificed.


Milton.

Sac"ri*fi`cer (?), n. One who sacrifices.

Sac`ri*fi"cial (?), a. Of or pertaining to sacrifice or sacrifices;
consisting in sacrifice; performing sacrifice. "Sacrificial rites."
Jer. Taylor.

Sac"ri*lege (?), n. [F. sacrilège, L. sacrilegium, from sacrilegus that
steals, properly, gathers or picks up, sacred things; sacer sacred +
legere to gather, pick up. See Sacred, and Legend.] The sin or crime of
violating or profaning sacred things; the alienating to laymen, or to
common purposes, what has been appropriated or consecrated to religious
persons or uses.

    And the hid treasures in her sacred tomb With sacrilege to dig.


Spenser.

    Families raised upon the ruins of churches, and enriched with the
    spoils of sacrilege.


South.

Sac`ri*le"gious (?), a. [From sacrilege: cf. L. sacrilegus.] Violating
sacred things; polluted with sacrilege; involving sacrilege; profane;
impious.

    Above the reach of sacrilegious hands.


Pope.

-- Sac`ri*le"gious*ly, adv. -- Sac`ri*le"gious*ness, n.

Sac"ri*le`gist (?), n. One guilty of sacrilege.

Sac"ring (?), a. & n. from Sacre.

Sacring bell. See Sanctus bell, under Sanctus.

Sa"crist (?), n. [LL. sacrista. See Sacristan.] A sacristan; also, a
person retained in a cathedral to copy out music for the choir, and
take care of the books.

Sac"ris*tan (?), n. [F. sacristain, LL. sacrista, fr. L. sacer. See
Sacred, and cf. Sexton.] An officer of the church who has the care of
the utensils or movables, and of the church in general; a sexton.

Sac"ris*ty (?), n.; pl. Sacristies (#). [F. sacristie, LL. sacristia,
fr. L. sacer. See Sacred.] An apartment in a church where the sacred
utensils, vestments, etc., are kept; a vestry.

Sa"cro- (&?;). (Anat.) A combining form denoting connection with, or
relation to, the sacrum, as in sacro-coccygeal, sacro-iliac,
sacrosciatic.

Sac"ro*sanct (?), a. [L. sucrosanctus.] Sacred; inviolable. [R.] Dr. H.
More.

Sa`cro*sci*at"ic (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to both the sacrum
and the hip; as, the sacrosciatic foramina formed by the sacrosciatic
ligaments which connect the sacrum and the hip bone.

Sa`cro*ver"te*bral (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sacrum and
that part of the vertebral column immediately anterior to it; as, the
sacrovertebral angle.

||Sa"crum (?), n.; pl. sacra (&?;). [NL., fr. L. sacer sacred, os
||sacrum the lowest bone of the spine.] (Anat.) That part of the
||vertebral column which is directly connected with, or forms a part
||of, the pelvis.

It may consist of a single vertebra or of several more or less
consolidated. In man it forms the dorsal, or posterior, wall of the
pelvis, and consists of five united vertebræ, which diminish in size
very rapidly to the posterior extremity, which bears the coccyx.

Sacs (sks), n. pl.; sing. Sac (&?;). (Ethnol.) A tribe of Indians,
which, together with the Foxes, formerly occupied the region about
Green Bay, Wisconsin. [Written also Sauks.]

Sad (sd), a. [Compar. Sadder (?); supperl. Saddest.] [OE. sad sated,
tired, satisfied, firm, steadfast, AS. sæd satisfied, sated; akin to D.
zat, OS. sad, G. satt, OHG. sat, Icel. saðr, saddr, Goth. saþs, Lith.
sotus, L. sat, satis, enough, satur sated, Gr. 'a`menai to satiate,
'a`dnh enough. Cf. Assets, Sate, Satiate, Satisfy, Satire.] 1. Sated;
satisfied; weary; tired. [Obs.]

    Yet of that art they can not waxen sad, For unto them it is a
    bitter sweet.


Chaucer.

2. Heavy; weighty; ponderous; close; hard. [Obs., except in a few
phrases; as, sad bread.]

    His hand, more sad than lump of lead.


Spenser.

    Chalky lands are naturally cold and sad.


Mortimer.

3. Dull; grave; dark; somber; -- said of colors. "Sad-colored clothes."
Walton.

    Woad, or wade, is used by the dyers to lay the foundation of all
    sad colors.


Mortimer.

4. Serious; grave; sober; steadfast; not light or frivolous. [Obs.]
"Ripe and sad courage." Chaucer.

    Lady Catharine, a sad and religious woman.


Bacon.

    Which treaty was wisely handled by sad and discrete counsel of both
    parties.


Ld. Berners.

5. Affected with grief or unhappiness; cast down with affliction;
downcast; gloomy; mournful.

    First were we sad, fearing you would not come; Now sadder, that you
    come so unprovided.


Shak.

    The angelic guards ascended, mute and sad.


Milton.

6. Afflictive; calamitous; causing sorrow; as, a sad accident; a sad
misfortune.

7. Hence, bad; naughty; troublesome; wicked. [Colloq.] "Sad tipsy
fellows, both of them." I. Taylor.

Sad is sometimes used in the formation of self- explaining compounds;
as, sad-colored, sad-eyed, sad-hearted, sad-looking, and the like.

Sad bread, heavy bread. [Scot. & Local, U.S.] Bartlett.

Syn. -- Sorrowful; mournful; gloomy; dejected; depressed; cheerless;
downcast; sedate; serious; grave; grievous; afflictive; calamitous.

Sad, v. t. To make sorrowful; to sadden. [Obs.]

    How it sadded the minister's spirits!


H. Peters.

||Sad"da (?), n. [Per. sad-dar the hundred gates or ways; sad a hundred
||+ dar door, way.] A work in the Persian tongue, being a summary of
||the Zend- Avesta, or sacred books.

Sad"den (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saddened (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Saddening.] To make sad. Specifically: (a) To render heavy or cohesive.
[Obs.]

    Marl is binding, and saddening of land is the great prejudice it
    doth to clay lands.


Mortimer.

(b) To make dull- or sad-colored, as cloth. (c) To make grave or
serious; to make melancholy or sorrowful.

    Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene.


Pope.

Sad"den, v. i. To become, or be made, sad. Tennyson.

Sad"der (?), n. Same as Sadda.

Sad"dle (?), n. [OE. sadel, AS. sadol; akin to D. zadel, G. sattel,
OHG. satal, satul, Icel. söðull, Dan. & Sw. sadel; cf. Russ. siedlo;
all perh. ultimately from the root of E. sit.] 1. A seat for a rider,
-- usually made of leather, padded to span comfortably a horse's back,
furnished with stirrups for the rider's feet to rest in, and fastened
in place with a girth; also, a seat for the rider on a bicycle or
tricycle.

2. A padded part of a harness which is worn on a horse's back, being
fastened in place with a girth. It serves various purposes, as to keep
the breeching in place, carry guides for the reins, etc.

3. A piece of meat containing a part of the backbone of an animal with
the ribs on each side; as, a saddle of mutton, of venison, etc.

4. (Naut.) A block of wood, usually fastened to some spar, and shaped
to receive the end of another spar.

5. (Mach.) A part, as a flange, which is hollowed out to fit upon a
convex surface and serve as a means of attachment or support.

6. (Zoöl.) The clitellus of an earthworm.

7. (Arch.) The threshold of a door, when a separate piece from the
floor or landing; -- so called because it spans and covers the joint
between two floors.

Saddle bar (Arch.), one the small iron bars to which the lead panels of
a glazed window are secured. Oxf. Gloss. -- Saddle gall (Far.), a sore
or gall upon a horse's back, made by the saddle. -- Saddle girth, a
band passing round the body of a horse to hold the saddle in its place.
-- saddle horse, a horse suitable or trained for riding with a saddle.
-- Saddle joint, in sheet-metal roofing, a joint formed by bending up
the edge of a sheet and folding it downward over the turned-up edge of
the next sheet. -- Saddle roof, (Arch.), a roof having two gables and
one ridge; -- said of such a roof when used in places where a different
form is more common; as, a tower surmounted by a saddle roof. Called
also saddleback roof. -- Saddle shell (Zoöl.), any thin plicated
bivalve shell of the genera Placuna and Anomia; -- so called from its
shape. Called also saddle oyster.

Sad"dle (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saddled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Saddling
(?).] [AS. sadelian.] 1. To put a saddle upon; to equip (a beast) for
riding. "saddle my horse." Shak.

    Abraham rose up early, . . . and saddled his ass.


Gen. xxii. 3.

2. Hence: To fix as a charge or burden upon; to load; to encumber; as,
to saddle a town with the expense of bridges and highways.

Sad"dle*back` (?), a. Same as Saddle-backed.

Saddleback roof. (Arch.) See Saddle roof, under Saddle.

Sad"dle*back`, n. 1. Anything saddle-backed; esp., a hill or ridge
having a concave outline at the top.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The harp seal. (b) The great blackbacked gull (Larus
marinus). (c) The larva of a bombycid moth (Empretia stimulea) which
has a large, bright green, saddle-shaped patch of color on the back.

Sad"dle-backed` (?), a. 1. Having the outline of the upper part concave
like the seat of a saddle.

2. Having a low back and high neck, as a horse.

Sad"dle*bags (?), n. pl. Bags, usually of leather, united by straps or
a band, formerly much used by horseback riders to carry small articles,
one bag hanging on each side.

Sad"dle*bow` (?), n. [AS. sadelboga.] The bow or arch in the front part
of a saddle, or the pieces which form the front.

Sad"dle*cloth` (?; 115), n. A cloth under a saddle, and extending out
behind; a housing.

Sad"dled (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a broad patch of color across the back,
like a saddle; saddle-backed.

Sad"dler (?), n. One who makes saddles.

2. (Zoöl.) A harp seal.

Sad"dler*y (?), n. 1. The materials for making saddles and harnesses;
the articles usually offered for sale in a saddler's shop.

2. The trade or employment of a saddler.

Sad"dle-shaped` (?), a. Shaped like a saddle. Specifically: (a) (Bot.)
Bent down at the sides so as to give the upper part a rounded form.
Henslow.

(b) (Geol.) Bent on each side of a mountain or ridge, without being
broken at top; -- said of strata.

Sad"dle*tree` (?), n. The frame of a saddle.

    For saddletree scarce reached had he, His journey to begin.


Cowper.

Sad`du*ca"ic (?; 135), a. Pertaining to, or like, the Sadducees; as,
Sadducaic reasonings.

Sad"du*cee (?), n. [L. Sadducaei, p., Gr. &?;, Heb. Tsaddkm; -- so
called from Tsdk, the founder of the sect.] One of a sect among the
ancient Jews, who denied the resurrection, a future state, and the
existence of angels. -- Sad`du*ce"an (#), a.

{ Sad"du*cee`ism (?), Sad"du*cism (?) }, n. The tenets of the
Sadducees.

Sad"du*cize (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sadducized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sadducizing (?).] To adopt the principles of the Sadducees. Atterbury.

Sadh (?), n. [Skr. sdhu perfect, pure.] A member of a monotheistic sect
of Hindoos. Sadhs resemble the Quakers in many respects. Balfour (Cyc.
of India).

Sad"i`ron (?), n. [Probably sad heavy + iron.] An iron for smoothing
clothes; a flatiron.

Sad"ly, adv. 1. Wearily; heavily; firmly. [Obs.]

    In go the spears full sadly in arest.


Chaucer.

2. Seriously; soberly; gravely. [Obs.]

    To tell thee sadly, shepherd, without blame Or our neglect, we lost
    her as we came.


Milton.

3. Grievously; deeply; sorrowfully; miserably. "He sadly suffers in
their grief." Dryden.

Sad"ness, n. 1. Heaviness; firmness. [Obs.]

2. Seriousness; gravity; discretion. [Obs.]

    Her sadness and her benignity.


Chaucer.

3. Quality of being sad, or unhappy; gloominess; sorrowfulness;
dejection.

    Dim sadness did not spare That time celestial visages.


Milton.

Syn. -- Sorrow; heaviness; dejection. See Grief.

||Sadr (?), n. (Bot.) A plant of the genus Ziziphus (Z. lotus); -- so
||called by the Arabs of Barbary, who use its berries for food. See
||Lotus (b).

||Saeng"er*fest (?), n. [G. sängerfest.] A festival of singers; a
||German singing festival.

Safe (?), a. [Compar. Safer (?); superl. Safest.] [OE. sauf, F. sauf,
fr. L. salvus, akin to salus health, welfare, safety. Cf. Salute,
Salvation, Sage a plant, Save, Salvo an exception.] 1. Free from harm,
injury, or risk; untouched or unthreatened by danger or injury;
unharmed; unhurt; secure; whole; as, safe from disease; safe from
storms; safe from foes. "And ye dwelled safe." 1 Sam. xii. 11.

    They escaped all safe to land.


Acts xxvii. 44.

    Established in a safe, unenvied throne.


Milton.

2. Conferring safety; securing from harm; not exposing to danger;
confining securely; to be relied upon; not dangerous; as, a safe
harbor; a safe bridge, etc. "The man of safe discretion." Shak.

    The King of heaven hath doomed This place our dungeon, not our safe
    retreat.


Milton.


3. Incapable of doing harm; no longer dangerous; in secure care or
custody; as, the prisoner is safe.

    But Banquo's safe? Ay, my good lord, safe in a ditch he bides.


Shak.

Safe hit (Baseball), a hit which enables the batter to get to first
base even if no error is made by the other side.

Syn. -- Secure; unendangered; sure.

Safe (?), n. A place for keeping things in safety. Specifically: (a) A
strong and fireproof receptacle (as a movable chest of steel, etc., or
a closet or vault of brickwork) for containing money, valuable papers,
or the like. (b) A ventilated or refrigerated chest or closet for
securing provisions from noxious animals or insects.

Safe, v. t. To render safe; to make right. [Obs.] Shak.

Safe"-con"duct (?), n. [Safe + conduct: cf. F. sauf-conduit.] That
which gives a safe passage; either (a) a convoy or guard to protect a
person in an enemy's country or a foreign country, or (b) a writing,
pass, or warrant of security, given to a person to enable him to travel
with safety. Shak.

Safe`-con*duct" (?), v. t. To conduct safely; to give safe-conduct to.
[Poetic]

    He him by all the bonds of love besought To safe-conduct his love.


Spenser.

Safe"guard` (?), n. [Safe = guard: cf. F. sauvegarde.] 1. One who, or
that which, defends or protects; defense; protection. Shak.

    Thy sword, the safeguard of thy brother's throne.


Granville.

2. A convoy or guard to protect a traveler or property.

3. A pass; a passport; a safe-conduct. Shak.

Safe"guard`, v. t. To guard; to protect. Shak.

Safe"-keep"ing (?), n. [Safe + keep.] The act of keeping or preserving
in safety from injury or from escape; care; custody.

Safe"ly, adv. In a safe manner; danger, injury, loss, or evil
consequences.

Safe"ness, n. The quality or state of being safe; freedom from hazard,
danger, harm, or loss; safety; security; as the safeness of an
experiment, of a journey, or of a possession.

Safe"-pledge" (?), n. (Law) A surety for the appearance of a person at
a given time. Bracton.

Safe"ty (?), n. [Cf. F. sauveté.] 1. The condition or state of being
safe; freedom from danger or hazard; exemption from hurt, injury, or
loss.

    Up led by thee, Into the heaven I have presumed, An earthly guest .
    . . With like safety guided down, Return me to my native element.


Milton.

2. Freedom from whatever exposes one to danger or from liability to
cause danger or harm; safeness; hence, the quality of making safe or
secure, or of giving confidence, justifying trust, insuring against
harm or loss, etc.

    Would there were any safety in thy sex, That I might put a thousand
    sorrows off, And credit thy repentance!


Beau. & Fl.

3. Preservation from escape; close custody.

    Imprison him, . . . Deliver him to safety; and return.


Shak.

4. (Football) Same as Safety touchdown, below.

Safety arch (Arch.), a discharging arch. See under Discharge, v. t. --
Safety belt, a belt made of some buoyant material, or which is capable
of being inflated, so as to enable a person to float in water; a life
preserver. -- Safety buoy, a buoy to enable a person to float in water;
a safety belt. -- Safety cage (Mach.), a cage for an elevator or mine
lift, having appliances to prevent it from dropping if the lifting rope
should break. -- Safety lamp. (Mining) See under Lamp. -- Safety match,
a match which can be ignited only on a surface specially prepared for
the purpose. -- Safety pin, a pin made in the form of a clasp, with a
guard covering its point so that it will not prick the wearer. --
Safety plug. See Fusible plug, under Fusible. -- Safety switch. See
Switch. -- Safety touchdown (Football), the act or result of a player's
touching to the ground behind his own goal line a ball which received
its last impulse from a man on his own side; -- distinguished from
touchback. See Touchdown. -- Safety tube (Chem.), a tube to prevent
explosion, or to control delivery of gases by an automatic valvular
connection with the outer air; especially, a bent funnel tube with
bulbs for adding those reagents which produce unpleasant fumes or
violent effervescence. -- Safety valve, a valve which is held shut by a
spring or weight and opens automatically to permit the escape of steam,
or confined gas, water, etc., from a boiler, or other vessel, when the
pressure becomes too great for safety; also, sometimes, a similar valve
opening inward to admit air to a vessel in which the pressure is less
than that of the atmosphere, to prevent collapse.

Saf"flow (?), n. (Bot.) The safflower. [Obs.]

Saf"flow`er (?), n. [F. safleur, saflor, for safran, influenced by
fleur flower. See Saffron, and Flower.] 1. (Bot.) An annual composite
plant (Carthamus tinctorius), the flowers of which are used as a
dyestuff and in making rouge; bastard, or false, saffron.

2. The dried flowers of the Carthamus tinctorius.

3. A dyestuff from these flowers. See Safranin (b).

Oil of safflower, a purgative oil expressed from the seeds of the
safflower.

Saf"fron (?; 277), n. [OE. saffran, F. safran; cf. It. zafferano, Sp.
azafran, Pg. açafrão; all fr. Ar. & Per. za' farn.] 1. (Bot.) A bulbous
iridaceous plant (Crocus sativus) having blue flowers with large yellow
stigmas. See Crocus.

2. The aromatic, pungent, dried stigmas, usually with part of the
stile, of the Crocus sativus. Saffron is used in cookery, and in
coloring confectionery, liquors, varnishes, etc., and was formerly much
used in medicine.

3. An orange or deep yellow color, like that of the stigmas of the
Crocus sativus.

Bastard saffron, Dyer's saffron. (Bot.) See Safflower. -- Meadow
saffron (Bot.), a bulbous plant (Colchichum autumnale) of Europe,
resembling saffron. -- Saffron wood (Bot.), the yellowish wood of a
South African tree (Elæodendron croceum); also, the tree itself. --
Saffron yellow, a shade of yellow like that obtained from the stigmas
of the true saffron (Crocus sativus).

Saf"fron (?; 277), a. Having the color of the stigmas of saffron
flowers; deep orange-yellow; as, a saffron face; a saffron streamer.

Saf"fron, v. t. To give color and flavor to, as by means of saffron; to
spice. [Obs.]

    And in Latyn I speak a wordes few, To saffron with my predication.


Chaucer.

Saf"fron*y (?), a. Having a color somewhat like saffron; yellowish.
Lord (1630).

Saf"ra*nin (?), n. (Chem.) (a) An orange-red dyestuff extracted from
the saffron. [R.] (b) A red dyestuff extracted from the safflower, and
formerly used in dyeing wool, silk, and cotton pink and scarlet; --
called also Spanish red, China lake, and carthamin. (c) An orange-red
dyestuff prepared from certain nitro compounds of creosol, and used as
a substitute for the safflower dye.

Saf"ra*nine (? or ?), n. [So called because used as a substitute for
safranin.] (Chem.) An orange-red nitrogenous dyestuff produced
artificially by oxidizing certain aniline derivatives, and used in
dyeing silk and wool; also, any one of the series of which safranine
proper is the type.

Sag (sg), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sagged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sagging (?).]
[Akin to Sw. sacka to settle, sink down, LG. sacken, D. zakken. Cf.
Sink, v. i.] 1. To sink, in the middle, by its weight or under applied
pressure, below a horizontal line or plane; as, a line or cable
supported by its ends sags, though tightly drawn; the floor of a room
sags; hence, to lean, give way, or settle from a vertical position; as,
a building may sag one way or another; a door sags on its hinges.

2. Fig.: To lose firmness or elasticity; to sink; to droop; to flag; to
bend; to yield, as the mind or spirits, under the pressure of care,
trouble, doubt, or the like; to be unsettled or unbalanced. [R.]

    The mind I sway by, and the heart I bear, Shall never sag with
    doubt nor shake with fear.


Shak.

3. To loiter in walking; to idle along; to drag or droop heavily.

To sag to leeward (Naut.), to make much leeway by reason of the wind,
sea, or current; to drift to leeward; -- said of a vessel. Totten.

Sag, v. t. To cause to bend or give way; to load.

Sag, n. State of sinking or bending; sagging.

Sa"ga (s"g), n.; pl. Sagas (-gz). [Icel., akin to E. saw a saying. See
Say, and cf. Saw.] A Scandinavian legend, or heroic or mythic
tradition, among the Norsemen and kindred people; a northern European
popular historical or religious tale of olden time.

    And then the blue-eyed Norseman told A saga of the days of old.


Longfellow.

Sa*ga"cious (?), a. [L. sagax, sagacis, akin to sagire to perceive
quickly or keenly, and probably to E. seek. See Seek, and cf. Presage.]
1. Of quick sense perceptions; keen-scented; skilled in following a
trail.

    Sagacious of his quarry from so far.


Milton.

2. Hence, of quick intellectual perceptions; of keen penetration and
judgment; discerning and judicious; knowing; far-sighted; shrewd; sage;
wise; as, a sagacious man; a sagacious remark.

    Instinct . . . makes them, many times, sagacious above our
    apprehension.


Dr. H. More.

    Only sagacious heads light on these observations, and reduce them
    into general propositions.


Locke.

Syn. -- See Shrewd.

-- Sa*ga"cious*ly, adv. -- Sa*ga"cious*ness, n.

Sa*gac"i*ty (?), n. [L. sagacitas. See Sagacious.] The quality of being
sagacious; quickness or acuteness of sense perceptions; keenness of
discernment or penetration with soundness of judgment; shrewdness.

    Some [brutes] show that nice sagacity of smell.


Cowper.

    Natural sagacity improved by generous education.


V. Knox.

Syn. -- Penetration; shrewdness; judiciousness. -- Sagacity,
Penetration. Penetration enables us to enter into the depths of an
abstruse subject, to detect motives, plans, etc. Sagacity adds to
penetration a keen, practical judgment, which enables one to guard
against the designs of others, and to turn everything to the best
possible advantage.

Sag"a*more (?), n. 1. [Cf. Sachem.] The head of a tribe among the
American Indians; a chief; -- generally used as synonymous with sachem,
but some writters distinguished between them, making the sachem a chief
of the first rank, and a sagamore one of the second rank. "Be it
sagamore, sachem, or powwow." Longfellow.

2. A juice used in medicine. [Obs.] Johnson.

Sag"a*pen (?), n. Sagapenum.

||Sag`a*pe"num (?), n. [L. sagapenon, sacopenium, Gr. &?;: cf. F.
||sagapin, gomme sagapin, sagapénum, Ar. sikbnaj, Per. sakbnah,
||sikbnah.] (Med.) A fetid gum resin obtained from a species of Ferula.
||It has been used in hysteria, etc., but is now seldom met with. U. S.
||Disp.

Sag"a*thy (?), n. [F. sagatis: cf. Sp. sagatí, saetí.] A mixed woven
fabric of silk and cotton, or silk and wool; sayette; also, a light
woolen fabric.

Sage (?), n. [OE. sauge, F. sauge, L. salvia, from salvus saved, in
allusion to its reputed healing virtues. See Safe.] (Bot.) (a) A
suffruticose labiate plant (Salvia officinalis) with grayish green
foliage, much used in flavoring meats, etc. The name is often extended
to the whole genus, of which many species are cultivated for ornament,
as the scarlet sage, and Mexican red and blue sage. (b) The sagebrush.

Meadow sage (Bot.), a blue-flowered species of Salvia (S. pratensis)
growing in meadows in Europe. -- Sage cheese, cheese flavored with
sage, and colored green by the juice of leaves of spinach and other
plants which are added to the milk. -- Sage cock (Zoöl.), the male of
the sage grouse; in a more general sense, the specific name of the sage
grouse. -- Sage green, of a dull grayish green color, like the leaves
of garden sage. -- Sage grouse (Zoöl.), a very large American grouse
(Centrocercus urophasianus), native of the dry sagebrush plains of
Western North America. Called also cock of the plains. The male is
called sage cock, and the female sage hen. -- Sage hare, or Sage rabbit
(Zoöl.), a species of hare (Lepus Nuttalli, or artemisia) which
inhabits the arid regions of Western North America and lives among
sagebrush. By recent writers it is considered to be merely a variety of
the common cottontail, or wood rabbit. -- Sage hen (Zoöl.), the female
of the sage grouse. -- Sage sparrow (Zoöl.), a small sparrow
(Amphispiza Belli, var. Nevadensis) which inhabits the dry plains of
the Rocky Mountain region, living among sagebrush. -- Sage thrasher
(Zoöl.), a singing bird (Oroscoptes montanus) which inhabits the
sagebrush plains of Western North America. -- Sage willow (Bot.), a
species of willow (Salix tristis) forming a low bush with nearly
sessile grayish green leaves.

Sage (?), a. [Compar. Sager (?); superl. Sagest.] [F., fr. L. sapius
(only in nesapius unwise, foolish), fr. sapere to be wise; perhaps akin
to E. sap. Cf. Savor, Sapient, Insipid.] 1. Having nice discernment and
powers of judging; prudent; grave; sagacious.

    All you sage counselors, hence!


Shak.

2. Proceeding from wisdom; well judged; shrewd; well adapted to the
purpose.

    Commanders, who, cloaking their fear under show of sage advice,
    counseled the general to retreat.


Milton.

3. Grave; serious; solemn. [R.] "[Great bards] in sage and solemn tunes
have sung." Milton.

Syn. -- Wise; sagacious; sapient; grave; prudent; judicious.

Sage, n. A wise man; a man of gravity and wisdom; especially, a man
venerable for years, and of sound judgment and prudence; a grave
philosopher.

    At his birth a star, Unseen before in heaven, proclaims him come,
    And guides the Eastern sages.


Milton.

Sage"brush` (?), n. A low irregular shrub (Artemisia tridentata), of
the order Compositæ, covering vast tracts of the dry alkaline regions
of the American plains; -- called also sagebush, and wild sage.

Sage"ly, adv. In a sage manner; wisely.

Sa*gene" (?), n. [Russ. sajene.] A Russian measure of length equal to
about seven English feet.

Sage"ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sage; wisdom; sagacity;
prudence; gravity. Ascham.

Sag"e*nite (?), n. [F. sagénite, fr. L. sagena a large net. See Seine.]
(Min.) Acicular rutile occurring in reticulated forms imbedded in
quartz.

Sag`e*nit"ic (?), a. (Min.) Resembling sagenite; -- applied to quartz
when containing acicular crystals of other minerals, most commonly
rutile, also tourmaline, actinolite, and the like.

Sag"ger (?), n. [See Seggar.] 1. A pot or case of fire clay, in which
fine stoneware is inclosed while baking in the kiln; a seggar.

2. The clay of which such pots or cases are made.

Sag"ging (?), n. A bending or sinking between the ends of a thing, in
consequence of its own, or an imposed, weight; an arching downward in
the middle, as of a ship after straining. Cf. Hogging.

Sag"i*nate (?), v. t. [L. saginatus, p. p. of saginare to fat, fr.
sagina stuffing.] To make fat; to pamper. [R.] "Many a saginated boar."
Cowper.

Sag`i*na"tion (?), n. [L. saginatio.] The act of fattening or
pampering. [R.] Topsell.

||Sa*git"ta (?), n. [L., an arrow.] 1. (Astron.) A small constellation
||north of Aquila; the Arrow.

2. (Arch.) The keystone of an arch. [R.] Gwilt.

3. (Geom.) The distance from a point in a curve to the chord; also, the
versed sine of an arc; -- so called from its resemblance to an arrow
resting on the bow and string. [Obs.]

4. (Anat.) The larger of the two otoliths, or ear bones, found in most
fishes.

5. (Zoöl.) A genus of transparent, free-swimming marine worms having
lateral and caudal fins, and capable of swimming rapidly. It is the
type of the class Chætognatha.

Sag"it*tal (?), a. [L. sagitta an arrow: cf. F. sagittal.] 1. Of or
pertaining to an arrow; resembling an arrow; furnished with an
arrowlike appendage.

2. (Anat.) (a) Of or pertaining to the sagittal suture; in the region
of the sagittal suture; rabdoidal; as, the sagittal furrow, or groove,
on the inner surface of the roof of the skull. (b) In the mesial plane;
mesial; as, a sagittal section of an animal.

Sagittal suture (Anat.), the suture between the two parietal bones in
the top of the skull; -- called also rabdoidal suture, and
interparietal suture.

||Sag`it*ta"ri*us (?), n. [L., literally, an archer, fr. sagittarius
||belonging to an arrow, fr. sagitta an arrow.] (Astron.) (a) The ninth
||of the twelve signs of the zodiac, which the sun enters about
||November 22, marked thus [] in almanacs; the Archer. (b) A zodiacal
||constellation, represented on maps and globes as a centaur shooting
||an arrow.

Sag"it*ta"ry (?), n. [See Sagittarius.] 1. (Myth.) A centaur; a
fabulous being, half man, half horse, armed with a bow and quiver.
Shak.

2. The Arsenal in Venice; -- so called from having a figure of an
archer over the door. Shak.

Sag"it*ta*ry, a. [L. sagittarius.] Pertaining to, or resembling, an
arrow. Sir T. Browne.

Sag"it*tate (?), a. [NL. sagittatus, fr. L. sagitta an arrow.] Shaped
like an arrowhead; triangular, with the two basal angles prolonged
downward.

Sag"it*ta`ted (?), a. Sagittal; sagittate.

Sag"it*to*cyst (?), n. [See Sagitta, and Cyst.] (Zoöl.) A defensive
cell containing a minute rodlike structure which may be expelled. Such
cells are found in certain Turbellaria.

Sa"go (s"g), n. [Malay. sgu.] A dry granulated starch imported from the
East Indies, much used for making puddings and as an article of diet
for the sick; also, as starch, for stiffening textile fabrics. It is
prepared from the stems of several East Indian and Malayan palm trees,
but chiefly from the Metroxylon Sagu; also from several cycadaceous
plants (Cycas revoluta, Zamia integrifolia, etc.).

Portland sago, a kind of sago prepared from the corms of the cuckoopint
(Arum maculatum). -- Sago palm. (Bot.) (a) A palm tree which yields
sago. (b) A species of Cycas (Cycas revoluta). -- Sago spleen (Med.), a
morbid condition of the spleen, produced by amyloid degeneration of the
organ, in which a cross section shows scattered gray translucent bodies
looking like grains of sago.

Sa*goin" (?), n. [F. sagouin(formed from the native South American
name).] (Zoöl.) A marmoset; -- called also sagouin.

||Sa"gum (?), n.; pl. Saga (#). [L. sagum, sagus; cf. Gr. &?;. Cf. Say
||a kind of serge.] (Rom. Antiq.) The military cloak of the Roman
||soldiers.

||Sa"gus (?), n. [NL. See Sago.] (Bot.) A genus of palms from which
||sago is obtained.

Sa"gy (?), a. Full of sage; seasoned with sage.

||Sa"hib (?), ||Sa"heb (&?;), n. [Ar. çhib master, lord, fem. çhibah.]
||A respectful title or appellation given to Europeans of rank. [India]

||Sa"hi*bah (?), n. [See Sahib.] A lady; mistress. [India]

Sa*hid"ic (?), a. Same as Thebaic.

Sah"lite (?), n. (Min.) See Salite.

||Sa*hui" (?), n. (Zoöl.) A marmoset.

||Sa"i (?), n. [Cf. Pg. sahi.] (Zoöl.) See Capuchin, 3 (a).

||Sai"bling (?), n. [Dial. G.] (Zoöl.) A European mountain trout
||(Salvelinus alpinus); -- called also Bavarian charr.

Sa"ic (?), n. [F. saïque, Turk. shaïka.] (Naut.) A kind of ketch very
common in the Levant, which has neither topgallant sail nor mizzen
topsail.

Said (?), imp. & p. p. of Say.

Said, a. Before-mentioned; already spoken of or specified; aforesaid;
-- used chiefly in legal style.

||Sai"ga (?), n. [Russ. saika.] (Zoöl.) An antelope (Saiga Tartarica)
||native of the plains of Siberia and Eastern Russia. The male has
||erect annulated horns, and tufts of long hair beneath the eyes and
||ears.

Sai"kyr (?), n. (Mil.) Same as Saker. [Obs.]

Sail (?), n. [OE. seil, AS. segel, segl; akin to D. zeil, OHG. segal,
G. & Sw. segel, Icel. segl, Dan. seil. &radic; 153.] 1. An extent of
canvas or other fabric by means of which the wind is made serviceable
as a power for propelling vessels through the water.

    Behoves him now both sail and oar.


Milton.

2. Anything resembling a sail, or regarded as a sail.

3. A wing; a van. [Poetic]

    Like an eagle soaring To weather his broad sails.


Spenser.

4. The extended surface of the arm of a windmill.

5. A sailing vessel; a vessel of any kind; a craft.

In this sense, the plural has usually the same form as the singular;
as, twenty sail were in sight.

6. A passage by a sailing vessel; a journey or excursion upon the
water.

Sails are of two general kinds, fore-and-aft sails, and square sails.
Square sails are always bent to yards, with their foot lying across the
line of the vessel. Fore-and-aft sails are set upon stays or gaffs with
their foot in line with the keel. A fore- and-aft sail is triangular,
or quadrilateral with the after leech longer than the fore leech.
Square sails are quadrilateral, but not necessarily square. See Phrases
under Fore, a., and Square, a.; also, Bark, Brig, Schooner, Ship, Stay.

Sail burton (Naut.), a purchase for hoisting sails aloft for bending.
-- Sail fluke (Zoöl.), the whiff. -- Sail hook, a small hook used in
making sails, to hold the seams square. -- Sail loft, a loft or room
where sails are cut out and made. -- Sail room (Naut.), a room in a
vessel where sails are stowed when not in use. -- Sail yard (Naut.),
the yard or spar on which a sail is extended. -- Shoulder-of- mutton
sail (Naut.), a triangular sail of peculiar form. It is chiefly used to
set on a boat's mast. -- To crowd sail. (Naut.) See under Crowd. -- To
loose sails (Naut.), to unfurl or spread sails. -- To make sail
(Naut.), to extend an additional quantity of sail. -- To set a sail
(Naut.), to extend or spread a sail to the wind. -- To set sail
(Naut.), to unfurl or spread the sails; hence, to begin a voyage. -- To
shorten sail (Naut.), to reduce the extent of sail, or take in a part.
-- To strike sail (Naut.), to lower the sails suddenly, as in saluting,
or in sudden gusts of wind; hence, to acknowledge inferiority; to abate
pretension. -- Under sail, having the sails spread.

Sail (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sailed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sailing.]
[AS. segelian, seglian. See Sail, n.] 1. To be impelled or driven
forward by the action of wind upon sails, as a ship on water; to be
impelled on a body of water by the action of steam or other power.

2. To move through or on the water; to swim, as a fish or a water fowl.

3. To be conveyed in a vessel on water; to pass by water; as, they
sailed from London to Canton.

4. To set sail; to begin a voyage.

5. To move smoothly through the air; to glide through the air without
apparent exertion, as a bird.

    As is a winged messenger of heaven, . . . When he bestrides the
    lazy pacing clouds, And sails upon the bosom of the air.


Shak.

Sail, v. t. 1. To pass or move upon, as in a ship, by means of sails;
hence, to move or journey upon (the water) by means of steam or other
force.

    A thousand ships were manned to sail the sea.


Dryden.

2. To fly through; to glide or move smoothly through.

    Sublime she sails The aërial space, and mounts the wingèd gales.


Pope.

3. To direct or manage the motion of, as a vessel; as, to sail one's
own ship. Totten.

Sail"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being sailed over; navigable; as, a
sailable river.

Sail"boat`, n. A boat propelled by a sail or sails.

Sail"cloth` (?), n. Duck or canvas used in making sails.

Sail"er (?), n. 1. A sailor. [R.] Sir P. Sidney.

2. A ship or other vessel; -- with qualifying words descriptive of
speed or manner of sailing; as, a heavy sailer; a fast sailer.

Sail"fish (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The banner fish, or spikefish
(Histiophorus.) (b) The basking, or liver, shark. (c) The quillback.

Sail"ing (?), n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, sails; the
motion of a vessel on water, impelled by wind or steam; the act of
starting on a voyage.

2. (Naut.) The art of managing a vessel; seamanship; navigation; as,
globular sailing; oblique sailing.

For the several methods of sailing, see under Circular, Globular,
Oblique, Parallel, etc.

Sailing master (U. S. Navy), formerly, a warrant officer, ranking next
below a lieutenant, whose duties were to navigate the vessel; and under
the direction of the executive officer, to attend to the stowage of the
hold, to the cables, rigging, etc. The grade was merged in that of
master in 1862.

Sail"less (?), a. Destitute of sails. Pollok.

Sail"mak`er (?), n. One whose occupation is to make or repair sails. --
Sail"mak`ing, n.

Sail"or (?), n. One who follows the business of navigating ships or
other vessels; one who understands the practical management of ships;
one of the crew of a vessel; a mariner; a common seaman.

Syn. -- Mariner; seaman; seafarer.

Sailor's choice. (Zoöl.) (a) An excellent marine food fish (Diplodus,
or Lagodon, rhomboides) of the Southern United States; -- called also
porgy, squirrel fish, yellowtail, and salt- water bream. (b) A species
of grunt (Orthopristis, or Pomadasys, chrysopterus), an excellent food
fish common on the southern coasts of the United States; -- called also
hogfish, and pigfish.

Sail"y (?), a. Like a sail. [R.] Drayton.

Saim (?), n. [OF. sain, LL. saginum, fr. L. sagina a fattening.] Lard;
grease. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

||Sai*mir" (?), n. (Zoöl.) The squirrel monkey.

Sain (?), obs. p. p. of Say, for sayen. Said. Shak.

Sain, v. t. [Cf. Saint, Sane.] To sanctify; to bless so as to protect
from evil influence. [R.] Sir W. Scott.

Sain"foin (?; 277), n. [F., fr. sain wholesome (L. sanus; see Sane.) +
foin hay (L. fænum); or perh. fr. saint sacred (L. sanctus; see Saint)
+ foin hay.] (Bot.) (a) A leguminous plant (Onobrychis sativa)
cultivated for fodder. [Written also saintfoin.] (b) A kind of tick
trefoil (Desmodium Canadense). [Canada]

Saint (snt), n. [F., fr. L. sanctus sacred, properly p. p. of sancire
to render sacred by a religious act, to appoint as sacred; akin to
sacer sacred. Cf. Sacred, Sanctity, Sanctum, Sanctus.] 1. A person
sanctified; a holy or godly person; one eminent for piety and virtue;
any true Christian, as being redeemed and consecrated to God.

    Them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints.


1 Cor. i. 2.

2. One of the blessed in heaven.

    Then shall thy saints, unmixed, and from the impure Far separate,
    circling thy holy mount, Unfeigned hallelujahs to thee sing.


Milton.

3. (Eccl.) One canonized by the church. [Abbrev. St.]

Saint Andrew's cross. (a) A cross shaped like the letter X. See
Illust. 4, under Cross. (b) (Bot.) A low North American shrub (Ascyrum
Crux-Andreæ, the petals of which have the form of a Saint Andrew's
cross. Gray. -- Saint Anthony's cross, a T-shaped cross. See Illust. 6,
under Cross. -- Saint Anthony's fire, the erysipelas; -- popularly so
called because it was supposed to have been cured by the intercession
of Saint Anthony. -- Saint Anthony's nut (Bot.), the groundnut (Bunium
flexuosum); -- so called because swine feed on it, and St. Anthony
was once a swineherd. Dr. Prior. -- Saint Anthony's turnip (Bot.),
the bulbous crowfoot, a favorite food of swine. Dr. Prior. -- Saint
Barnaby's thistle (Bot.), a kind of knapweed (Centaurea solstitialis)
flowering on St. Barnabas's Day, June 11th. Dr. Prior. -- Saint Bernard
(Zoöl.), a breed of large, handsome dogs celebrated for strength and
sagacity, formerly bred chiefly at the Hospice of St. Bernard in
Switzerland, but now common in Europe and America. There are two races,
the smooth-haired and the rough-haired. See Illust. under Dog. -- Saint
Catharine's flower (Bot.), the plant love-in-a-mist. See under Love.
-- Saint Cuthbert's beads (Paleon.), the fossil joints of crinoid
stems. -- Saint Dabeoc's heath (Bot.), a heatherlike plant (Dabœcia
polifolia), named from an Irish saint. -- Saint Distaff's Day. See
under Distaff. -- Saint Elmo's fire, a luminous, flamelike appearance,
sometimes seen in dark, tempestuous nights, at some prominent point
on a ship, particularly at the masthead and the yardarms. It has also
been observed on land, and is due to the discharge of electricity from
elevated or pointed objects. A single flame is called a Helena, or a
Corposant; a double, or twin, flame is called a Castor and Pollux, or
a double Corposant. It takes its name from St. Elmo, the patron saint
of sailors. -- Saint George's cross (Her.), a Greek cross gules upon a
field argent, the field being represented by a narrow fimbriation in
the ensign, or union jack, of Great Britain. -- Saint George's ensign,
a red cross on a white field with a union jack in the upper corner
next the mast. It is the distinguishing badge of ships of the royal
navy of England; -- called also the white ensign. Brande & C. -- Saint
George's flag, a smaller flag resembling the ensign, but without the
union jack; used as the sign of the presence and command of an admiral.
[Eng.] Brande & C. -- Saint Gobain glass (Chem.), a fine variety of
soda-lime plate glass, so called from St. Gobain in France, where it
was manufactured. -- Saint Ignatius's bean (Bot.), the seed of a tree
of the Philippines (Strychnos Ignatia), of properties similar to the
nux vomica. -- Saint James's shell (Zoöl.), a pecten (Vola Jacobæus)
worn by pilgrims to the Holy Land. See Illust. under Scallop. -- Saint
James's-wort (Bot.), a kind of ragwort (Senecio Jacobæa). -- Saint
John's bread. (Bot.) See Carob. -- Saint John's-wort (Bot.), any plant
of the genus Hypericum, most species of which have yellow flowers;
-- called also John's-wort. -- Saint Leger, the name of a race for
three-year-old horses run annually in September at Doncaster, England;
-- instituted in 1776 by Col. St. Leger. -- Saint Martin's herb (Bot.),
a small tropical American violaceous plant (Sauvagesia erecta). It is
very mucilaginous and is used in medicine. -- Saint Martin's summer, a
season of mild, damp weather frequently prevailing during late autumn
in England and the Mediterranean countries; -- so called from St.
Martin's Festival, occurring on November 11. It corresponds to the
Indian summer in America. Shak. Whittier. -- Saint Patrick's cross.
See Illust. 4, under Cross. -- Saint Patrick's Day, the 17th of March,
anniversary of the death (about 466) of St. Patrick, the apostle and
patron saint of Ireland. -- Saint Peter's fish. (Zoöl.) See John Dory,
under John. -- Saint Peter's-wort (Bot.), a name of several plants,
as Hypericum Ascyron, H. quadrangulum, Ascyrum stans, etc. -- Saint
Peter's wreath (Bot.), a shrubby kind of Spiræa (S. hypericifolia),
having long slender branches covered with clusters of small white
blossoms in spring. -- Saint's bell. See Sanctus bell, under Sanctus.
-- Saint Vitus's dance (Med.), chorea; -- so called from the supposed
cures wrought on intercession to this saint.

Saint (snt), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sainted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sainting.] To
make a saint of; to enroll among the saints by an offical act, as of
the pope; to canonize; to give the title or reputation of a saint to
(some one).

    A large hospital, erected by a shoemaker who has been beatified,
    though never sainted.


Addison.

To saint it, to act as a saint, or with a show of piety.

    Whether the charmer sinner it or saint it.


Pope.

Saint, v. i. To act or live as a saint. [R.] Shak.

Saint"dom (-dm), n. The state or character of a saint. [R.] Tennyson.

Saint"ed, a. 1. Consecrated; sacred; holy; pious. "A most sainted
king." Shak.

    Amongst the enthroned gods on sainted seats.


Milton.

2. Entered into heaven; -- a euphemism for dead.

Saint"ess, n. A female saint. [R.] Bp. Fisher.

Saint"hood (?), n. 1. The state of being a saint; the condition of a
saint. Walpole.

2. The order, or united body, of saints; saints, considered
collectively.

    It was supposed he felt no call to any expedition that might
    endanger the reign of the military sainthood.


Sir W. Scott.

Saint"ish, a. Somewhat saintlike; - - used ironically.

Saint"ism (?), n. The character or quality of saints; also,
hypocritical pretense of holiness. Wood.

Saint"like` (?), a. Resembling a saint; suiting a saint; becoming a
saint; saintly.

    Glossed over only with a saintlike show.


Dryden.

Saint"li*ness (?), n. Quality of being saintly.

Saint"ly, a. [Compar. Saintlier (?); superl. Saintliest.] Like a saint;
becoming a holy person.

    So dear to Heaven is saintly chastity.


Milton.

Saint*ol"o*gist (?), n. [Saint + -logy + -ist.] (Theol.) One who writes
the lives of saints. [R.]

Saint"ship, n. The character or qualities of a saint.

Saint`-Si*mo"ni*an (?), n. A follower of the Count de St. Simon, who
died in 1825, and who maintained that the principle of property held in
common, and the just division of the fruits of common labor among the
members of society, are the true remedy for the social evils which
exist. Brande & C.

Saint`-Si*mo"ni*an*ism (?), n. The principles, doctrines, or practice
of the Saint-Simonians; -- called also Saint- Simonism.

Saith (?), 3d pers. sing. pres. of Say. [Archaic]

Saithe (?), n. [Gael. saoidheam.] (Zoöl.) The pollock, or coalfish; --
called also sillock. [Scot.]

Sai"va (? or ?), n. [Skr. çaiva devoted to Siva.] One of an important
religious sect in India which regards Siva with peculiar veneration.

Sai"vism (?), n. The worship of Siva.

Sa*jene" (?), n. Same as Sagene.

Sa"jou (?; F. &?;), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sapajou.

Sake (sk), n. [OE. sake cause, also, lawsuit, fault, AS. sacu strife, a
cause or suit at law; akin to D. zaak cause, thing, affair, G. sache
thing, cause in law, OHG. sahha, Icel. sök, Sw. sak, Dan. sag, Goth.
sakj strife, AS. sacan to contend, strive, Goth. sakam, Icel. saka to
contend, strive, blame, OHG. sahhan, MHG. sachen, to contend, strive,
defend one's right, accuse, charge in a lawsuit, and also to E. seek.
Cf. Seek.] Final cause; end; purpose of obtaining; cause; motive;
reason; interest; concern; account; regard or respect; -- used chiefly
in such phrases as, for the sake of, for his sake, for man's sake, for
mercy's sake, and the like; as, to commit crime for the sake of gain;
to go abroad for the sake of one's health.

    Moved with wrath and shame and ladies' sake.


Spenser.

    I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake.


Gen. viii. 21.

    Will he draw out, For anger's sake, finite to infinite?


Milton.

    Knowledge is for the sake of man, and not man for the sake of
    knowledge.


Sir W. Hamilton.

The -s of the possessive case preceding sake is sometimes omitted for
euphony; as, for goodness sake. "For conscience sake." 1 Cor. x. 28.
The plural sakes is often used with a possessive plural. "For both our
sakes." Shak.

Sa"ker (s"kr), n. [F. sacre (cf. It. sagro, Sp. & Pg. sacre), either
fr. L. sacer sacred, holy, as a translation of Gr. "ie`rax falcon, from
"iero`s holy, or more probably from Ar. çaqr hawk.] [Written also
sacar, sacre.] 1. (Zoöl.) (a) A falcon (Falco sacer) native of Southern
Europe and Asia, closely resembling the lanner.

The female is called chargh, and the male charghela, or sakeret.

(b) The peregrine falcon. [Prov. Eng.]

2. (Mil.) A small piece of artillery. Wilhelm.

    On the bastions were planted culverins and sakers.


Macaulay.

    The culverins and sakers showing their deadly muzzles over the
    rampart.


Hawthorne.

Sa"ker*et (s"kr*t), n. [F. sacret. See Saker.] (Zoöl.) The male of the
saker (a).

Sa"ki (s"k), n. [Cf. F. & Pg. saki; probably from the native name.]
(Zoöl.) Any one of several species of South American monkeys of the
genus Pithecia. They have large ears, and a long hairy tail which is
not prehensile.

The black saki (Pithecia satanas), the white-headed (P. leucocephala),
and the red-backed, or hand-drinking, saki (P. chiropotes), are among
the best-known.

Sa"ki (sä"k), n. The alcoholic drink of Japan. It is made from rice.

Sak"ti (?), n. [Skr.] (Hind. Myth.) The divine energy, personified as
the wife of a deity (Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, etc.); the female principle.

||Sal (sl), n. [Hind. sl, Skr. çla.] (Bot.) An East Indian timber tree
||(Shorea robusta), much used for building purposes. It is of a light
||brown color, close-grained, heavy, and durable. [Written also saul.]

Sal (sl), n. [L. See Salt.] (Chem. & Pharm.) Salt.

Sal absinthii [NL.] (Old Chem.), an impure potassium carbonate obtained
from the ashes of wormwood (Artemisia Absinthium). -- Sal acetosellæ
[NL.] (Old Chem.), salt of sorrel. -- Sal alembroth. (Old Chem.) See
Alembroth. -- Sal ammoniac (Chem.), ammonium chloride, NH4Cl, a white
crystalline volatile substance having a sharp salty taste, obtained
from gas works, from nitrogenous matter, etc. It is largely employed as
a source of ammonia, as a reagent, and as an expectorant in bronchitis.
So called because originally made from the soot from camel's dung at
the temple of Jupiter Ammon in Africa. Called also muriate of ammonia.
-- Sal catharticus [NL.] (Old Med. Chem.), Epsom salts. -- Sal
culinarius [L.] (Old Chem.), common salt, or sodium chloride. -- Sal
Cyrenaicus. [NL.] (Old Chem.) See Sal ammoniac above. -- Sal de duobus,
Sal duplicatum [NL.] (Old Chem.), potassium sulphate; -- so called
because erroneously supposed to be composed of two salts, one acid and
one alkaline. -- Sal diureticus [NL.] (Old Med. Chem.), potassium
acetate. -- Sal enixum [NL.] (Old Chem.), acid potassium sulphate. --
Sal gemmæ [NL.] (Old Min.), common salt occuring native. -- Sal Jovis
[NL.] (Old Chem.), salt tin, or stannic chloride; -- the alchemical
name of tin being Jove. -- Sal Martis [NL.] (Old Chem.), green vitriol,
or ferrous sulphate; -- the alchemical name of iron being Mars. -- Sal
microcosmicum [NL.] (Old Chem.) See Microcosmic salt, under
Microcosmic. -- Sal plumbi [NL.] (Old Chem.), sugar of lead. -- Sal
prunella. (Old Chem.) See Prunella salt, under 1st Prunella. -- Sal
Saturni [NL.] (Old Chem.), sugar of lead, or lead acetate; -- the
alchemical name of lead being Saturn. -- Sal sedativus [NL.] (Old
Chem.), sedative salt, or boric acid. -- Sal Seignette [F. seignette,
sel de seignette] (Chem.), Rochelle salt. -- Sal soda (Chem.), sodium
carbonate. See under Sodium. -- Sal vitrioli [NL.] (Old Chem.), white
vitriol; zinc sulphate. -- Sal volatile. [NL.] (a) (Chem.) See Sal
ammoniac, above. (b) Spirits of ammonia.

||Sa*laam" (s*läm"), n. Same as Salam.

    Finally, Josiah might have made his salaam to the exciseman just as
    he was folding up that letter.


Prof. Wilson.

Sa*laam", v. i. To make or perform a salam.

    I have salaamed and kowtowed to him.


H. James.

Sal`a*bil"i*ty (?), n. The quality or condition of being salable;
salableness. Duke of Argyll.

Sal"a*ble (?), a. [From Sale.] Capable of being sold; fit to be sold;
finding a ready market. -- Sal"a*ble*ness, n. -- Sal"a*bly, adv.

Sa*la"cious (?), n. [L. salax, -acis, fond of leaping, lustful, fr.
salire to leap. See Salient.] Having a propensity to venery; lustful;
lecherous. Dryden.

-- Sa*la"cious*ly, adv. -- Sa*la"cious*ness, n.

Sa*lac"i*ty (?), n. [L. salacitas: cf. F. salacité] Strong propensity
to venery; lust; lecherousness.

Sal"ad (sl"ad), n. [F. salade, OIt. salata, It. insalata, fr. salare to
salt, fr. L. sal salt. See Salt, and cf. Slaw.] 1. A preparation of
vegetables, as lettuce, celery, water cress, onions, etc., usually
dressed with salt, vinegar, oil, and spice, and eaten for giving a
relish to other food; as, lettuce salad; tomato salad, etc.

    Leaves eaten raw are termed salad.


I. Watts.

2. A dish composed of chopped meat or fish, esp. chicken or lobster,
mixed with lettuce or other vegetables, and seasoned with oil, vinegar,
mustard, and other condiments; as, chicken salad; lobster salad.

Salad burnet (Bot.), the common burnet (Poterium Sanguisorba),
sometimes eaten as a salad in Italy.

Sal"ade (?), n. A helmet. See Sallet.

Sal"ad*ing (?), n. Vegetables for salad.

Sal`æ*ra"tus (?), n. See Saleratus.

Sal"a*gane (?), n. [From the Chinese name.] (Zoöl.) The esculent
swallow. See under Esculent.

Sal"al-ber`ry (?), n. [Probably of American Indian origin.] (Bot.) The
edible fruit of the Gaultheria Shallon, an ericaceous shrub found from
California northwards. The berries are about the size of a common grape
and of a dark purple color.

||Sa*lam (s*läm"), n. [Ar. salm peace, safety.] A salutation or
||compliment of ceremony in the east by word or act; an obeisance,
||performed by bowing very low and placing the right palm on the
||forehead. [Written also salaam.]

Sal"a*man`der (?), n. [F. salamandre, L. salamandra, Gr. &?;; cf. Per.
samander, samandel.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of Urodela,
belonging to Salamandra, Amblystoma, Plethodon, and various allied
genera, especially those that are more or less terrestrial in their
habits.

The salamanders have, like lizards, an elongated body, four feet, and a
long tail, but are destitute of scales. They are true Amphibia, related
to the frogs. Formerly, it was a superstition that the salamander could
live in fire without harm, and even extinguish it by the natural
coldness of its body.

    I have maintained that salamander of yours with fire any time this
    two and thirty years.


Shak.

    Whereas it is commonly said that a salamander extinguisheth fire,
    we have found by experience that on hot coals, it dieth
    immediately.


Sir T. Browne.

2. (Zoöl.) The pouched gopher (Geomys tuza) of the Southern United
States.

3. A culinary utensil of metal with a plate or disk which is heated,
and held over pastry, etc., to brown it.

4. A large poker. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

5. (Metal.) Solidified material in a furnace hearth.

Giant salamander. (Zoöl.) See under Giant. -- Salamander's hair or wool
(Min.), a species of asbestus or mineral flax. [Obs.] Bacon.

||Sal`a*man*dri"na (?), n.; pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A suborder of Urodela,
||comprising salamanders.

Sal`a*man"drine (?), a. Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a salamander;
enduring fire. Addison.

Sal`a*man"droid (?), a. [Salamander + -oid.] (Zoöl.) Like or pertaining
to the salamanders.

||Sal`a*man*droi"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A division of Amphibia
||including the Salamanders and allied groups; the Urodela.

Sal"am*stone` (? or ?), n. (Min.) A kind of blue sapphire brought from
Ceylon. Dana.

Sa*lan"ga*na (?), n. The salagane.

Sal"a*ried (?), a. Receiving a salary; paid by a salary; having a
salary attached; as, a salaried officer; a salaried office.

Sal"a*ry (?), a. [L. salarius.] Saline [Obs.]

Sal"a*ry (?), n.; pl. Salaries (#). [F. salaire, L. salarium,
originally, salt money, the money given to the Roman soldiers for salt,
which was a part of their pay, fr. salarius belonging to salt, fr. sal
salt. See Salt.] The recompense or consideration paid, or stipulated to
be paid, to a person at regular intervals for services; fixed wages, as
by the year, quarter, or month; stipend; hire.

    This is hire and salary, not revenge.


Shak.

Recompense for services paid at, or reckoned by, short intervals, as a
day or week, is usually called wages.

Syn. -- Stipend; pay; wages; hire; allowance.

Sal"a*ry v. t. [imp. & p. p. Salaried (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Salarying
(?).] To pay, or agree to pay, a salary to; to attach salary to; as, to
salary a clerk; to salary a position.

Sale (?), n. See 1st Sallow. [Obs.] Spenser.

Sale, n. [Icel. sala, sal, akin to E. sell. See Sell, v. t.] 1. The act
of selling; the transfer of property, or a contract to transfer the
ownership of property, from one person to another for a valuable
consideration, or for a price in money.

2. Opportunity of selling; demand; market.

    They shall have ready sale for them.


Spenser.

3. Public disposal to the highest bidder, or exposure of goods in
market; auction. Sir W. Temple.

Bill of sale. See under Bill. -- Of sale, On sale, For sale, to be
bought or sold; offered to purchasers; in the market. -- To set to
sale, to offer for sale; to put up for purchase; to make merchandise
of. [Obs.] Milton.

Sale"a*ble (?), a., Sale"a*bly, adv., etc. See Salable, Salably, etc.

Sal"eb (?), n. (Med.) See Salep.

Sal`e*bros"i*ty (?), n. Roughness or ruggedness. [Obs.] Feltham.

Sal"e*brous (?), a. [L. salebrosus, fr. salebra a rugged road, fr.
salire to leap.] Rough; rugged. [Obs.]

Sal"ep (sl"p), n. [Ar. sahleb, perhaps a corruption of an Arabic word
for fox, one Ar. name of the orchis signifying literally, fox's
testicles: cf. F. salep.] [Written also saleb, salop, and saloop.] The
dried tubers of various species of Orchis, and Eulophia. It is used to
make a nutritious beverage by treating the powdered preparation with
hot water. U. S. Disp.

Sal`e*ra"tus (?), n. [NL. sal aëratus; -- so called because it is a
source of fixed air (carbon dioxide). See Sal, and and Aërated.] (Old
Chem.) Aërated salt; a white crystalline substance having an alkaline
taste and reaction, consisting of sodium bicarbonate (see under
Sodium.) It is largely used in cooking, with sour milk (lactic acid) or
cream of tartar as a substitute for yeast. It is also an ingredient of
most baking powders, and is used in the preparation of effervescing
drinks.

Sales"man (slz"man), n.; pl. Salesmen (-men). [Sale + man.] One who
sells anything; one whose occupation is to sell goods or merchandise.

Sales"wom`an (?), n.; pl. Saleswomen (&?;). A woman whose occupation is
to sell goods or merchandise.

Sale"work` (?), n. Work or things made for sale; hence, work done
carelessly or slightingly. Shak.

Sa"lian (?), a. Denoting a tribe of Franks who established themselves
early in the fourth century on the river Sala [now Yssel]; Salic. -- n.
A Salian Frank.

Sa"li*ant (?), a. (Her.) Same as Salient.

Sal"i*aunce (?), a. [See Sally.] Salience; onslaught. [Obs.] "So fierce
saliaunce." Spenser.

Sal"ic (sl"k), a. [F. salique, fr. the Salian Franks, who, in the fifth
century, formed a body of laws called in Latin leges Salicæ.] Of or
pertaining to the Salian Franks, or to the Salic law so called. [Also
salique.]

Salic law. (a) A code of laws formed by the Salian Franks in the fifth
century. By one provision of this code women were excluded from the
inheritance of landed property. (b) Specifically, in modern times, a
law supposed to be a special application of the above-mentioned
provision, in accordance with which males alone can inherit the throne.
This law has obtained in France, and at times in other countries of
Europe, as Spain.

Sal`i*ca"ceous (sl`*k"shs), a. [L. salix, -icis, the willow.] Belonging
or relating to the willow.

Sal"i*cin (?), n. [L. salix, - icis, a willow: cf. F. salicine. See
Sallow the tree.] (Chem.) A glucoside found in the bark and leaves of
several species of willow (Salix) and poplar, and extracted as a bitter
white crystalline substance.

Sal"i*cyl (?), n. [Salicin + - yl.] (Chem.) The hypothetical radical of
salicylic acid and of certain related compounds.

Sal"i*cyl`al (?), n. [Salicylic + aldehide.] (Chem.) A thin, fragrant,
colorless oil, HO.C6H4.CHO, found in the flowers of meadow sweet
(Spiræa), and also obtained by oxidation of salicin, saligenin, etc. It
reddens on exposure. Called also salicylol, salicylic aldehyde, and
formerly salicylous, or spiroylous, acid.

Sal"i*cyl`ate (-t), n. (Chem.) A salt of salicylic acid.

Sal`i*cyl"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Pertaining to, derived from, or
designating, an acid formerly obtained by fusing salicin with potassium
hydroxide, and now made in large quantities from phenol (carbolic acid)
by the action of carbon dioxide on heated sodium phenolate. It is a
white crystalline substance. It is used as an antiseptic, and in its
salts in the treatment of rheumatism. Called also hydroxybenzoic acid.

Sal"i*cyl`ide (?), n. [Salicylic + anhydride.] (Chem.) A white
crystalline substance obtained by dehydration of salicylic acid.

Sal"i*cyl`ite (?), n. (Chem.) A compound of salicylal; -- named after
the analogy of a salt.

Sal"i*cyl`ol (?), n. [Salicylic + L. oleum oil.] (Chem.) Same as
Salicylal.

Sa*lic"y*lous (? or ?), a. (Chem.) Pertaining to, or designating, a
substance formerly called salicylous acid, and now salicylal. [Obs.]

Sa"li*ence (?), n. [See Salient.] 1. The quality or condition of being
salient; a leaping; a springing forward; an assaulting.

2. The quality or state of projecting, or being projected; projection;
protrusion. Sir W. Hamilton.

Sa"li*en*cy (?), n. Quality of being salient; hence, vigor. "A fatal
lack of poetic saliency." J. Morley.

Sa"li*ent (?), a. [L. saliens, -entis, p. pr. of salire to leap; cf. F.
saillant. See Sally, n. & v. i..] 1. Moving by leaps or springs;
leaping; bounding; jumping. "Frogs and salient animals." Sir T. Browne.

2. Shooting out or up; springing; projecting.

    He had in himself a salient, living spring of generous and manly
    action.


Burke.

3. Hence, figuratively, forcing itself on the attention; prominent;
conspicuous; noticeable.

    He [Grenville] had neither salient traits, nor general
    comprehensiveness of mind.


Bancroft.

4. (Math. & Fort.) Projecting outwardly; as, a salient angle; --
opposed to reëntering. See Illust. of Bastion.

5. (Her.) Represented in a leaping position; as, a lion salient.

Salient angle. See Salient, a., 4. -- Salient polygon (Geom.), a
polygon all of whose angles are salient. -- Salient polyhedron (Geom.),
a polyhedron all of whose solid angles are salient.

Sa"li*ent, a. (Fort.) A salient angle or part; a projection.

Sa"li*ent*ly, adv. In a salient manner.

Sa*lif"er*ous (?), a. [L. sal salt + -ferous.] Producing, or
impregnated with, salt.

Saliferous rocks (Geol.), the New Red Sandstone system of some
geologists; -- so called because, in Europe, this formation contains
beds of salt. The saliferous beds of New York State belong largely to
the Salina period of the Upper Silurian. See the Chart of Geology.

Sal"i*fi`a*ble (?), a. [Cf. F. salifiable. See Salify.] (Chem.) Capable
of neutralizing an acid to form a salt; -- said of bases; thus, ammonia
is salifiable.

Sal`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. salification.] (Chem.) The act,
process, or result of salifying; the state of being salified.

Sal"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Salified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Salifying (?).] [F. salifier; from L. sal salt + -ficare (only in
comp.) to make. See -fy.] (Chem.) (a) To combine or impregnate with a
salt. (b) To form a salt with; to convert into a salt; as, to salify a
base or an acid.

Sa*lig"e*nin (?), n. [Salicin + -gen.] (Chem.) A phenol alcohol
obtained, by the decomposition of salicin, as a white crystalline
substance; -- called also hydroxy-benzyl alcohol.

Sal"i*got (?), n. [F.] (Bot.) The water chestnut (Trapa natans).

Sal*im"e*ter (?), n. [L. sal salt + -meter.] An instrument for
measuring the amount of salt present in any given solution. [Written
also salometer.]

Sal*im"e*try (?), n. The art or process of measuring the amount of salt
in a substance.

Sa*li"na (?), n. [Cf. L. salinae, pl., salt works, from sal salt. See
Saline, a.] 1. A salt marsh, or salt pond, inclosed from the sea.

2. Salt works.

Sa*li"na pe"ri*od (?). [So called from Salina, a town in New York.]
(Geol.) The period in which the American Upper Silurian system,
containing the brine-producing rocks of central New York, was formed.
See the Chart of Geology.

Sal`i*na"tion (?), n. The act of washing with salt water. [R. & Obs.]
Greenhill.

Sa"line (? or ?; 277), a. [F. salin, fr. L. sal salt: cf. L. salinae
salt works, salinum saltcellar. See Salt.] 1. Consisting of salt, or
containing salt; as, saline particles; saline substances; a saline
cathartic.

2. Of the quality of salt; salty; as, a saline taste.

Sa"line (? or ?; 277), n. [Cf. F. saline. See Saline, a.] A salt
spring; a place where salt water is collected in the earth.

Sal"ine (?), n. 1. (Chem.) A crude potash obtained from beet-root
residues and other similar sources. [Written also salin.]

2. (Med. Chem.) A metallic salt; esp., a salt of potassium, sodium,
lithium, or magnesium, used in medicine.

Sa*line"ness (?), n. The quality or state of being salt; saltness.

Sal`i*nif"er*ous (?), a. [Saline + -ferous.] Same as Saliferous.

Sa*lin"i*form (?), a. Having the form or the qualities of a salt,
especially of common salt.

Sa*lin"i*ty (?), n. Salineness. Carpenter.

Sal`i*nom"e*ter (?), n. [Saline + -meter.] A salimeter.

Sa*lin"ous (?), a. Saline. [Obs.]

Sal"ique (? or ?), a. [F.] Salic. Shak.

    She fulmined out her scorn of laws salique.


Tennyson.

Sal`i*re"tin (?), n. [Saligenin + Gr. &?; resin.] (Chem.) A yellow
amorphous resinoid substance obtained by the action of dilute acids on
saligenin.

||Sal`is*bu"ri*a (?), n. [Named after R. A. Salisbury, an English
||botanist.] (Bot.) The ginkgo tree (Ginkgo biloba, or Salisburia
||adiantifolia).

Sal"ite (?), v. t. [L. salitus, p. p. of salire to salt, fr. sal salt.]
To season with salt; to salt. [Obs.]

Sa"lite (?), n. [So called from Sala, a town in Sweden.] (Min.) A
massive lamellar variety of pyroxene, of a dingy green color. [Written
also sahlite.]

Sa*li"va (?), n. [L.; cf. Gr. &?;.] (Physiol.) The secretion from the
salivary glands.

In man the saliva is a more or less turbid and slighty viscid fluid,
generally of an alkaline reaction, and is secreted by the parotid,
submaxillary, and sublingual glands. In the mouth the saliva is mixed
with the secretion from the buccal glands. The secretions from the
individual salivary glands have their own special characteristics, and
these are not the same in all animals. In man and many animals mixed
saliva, i.e., saliva composed of the secretions of all three of the
salivary glands, is an important digestive fluid on account of the
presence of the peculiar enzyme, ptyalin.

Sa*li"val (?; 277), a. Salivary.

Sal"i*vant (?), a. [L. salivans, p. pr. of salivare. See Salivate.]
Producing salivation.

Sal"i*vant, n. That which produces salivation.

Sal"i*va*ry (?), a. [L. salivarius slimy, clammy: cf. F. salivaire.]
(Physiol.) Of or pertaining to saliva; producing or carrying saliva;
as, the salivary ferment; the salivary glands; the salivary ducts, etc.

Sal"i*vate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Salivated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Salivating.] [L. salivatus, p. p. of salivare to salivate. See Saliva.]
To produce an abnormal flow of saliva in; to produce salivation or
ptyalism in, as by the use of mercury.

Sal`i*va"tion (?), n. [L. salivatio: cf. F. salivation.] (Physiol.) The
act or process of salivating; an excessive secretion of saliva, often
accompanied with soreness of the mouth and gums; ptyalism.

It may be induced by direct chemical or mechanical stimulation, as in
mastication of some tasteless substance like rubber, or indirectly by
some agent which affects the whole system, as mercury compounds.

Sa*li"vous (?), a. [L. salivosus: cf. F. saliveux.] Pertaining to
saliva; of the nature of saliva.

||Sa"lix (?), n.; pl. Salices (#). [L., the willow.] (Bot.) (a) A genus
||of trees or shrubs including the willow, osier, and the like, growing
||usually in wet grounds. (b) A tree or shrub of any kind of willow.

Sal"len*ders (?), n. pl. [F. solandres, solandre.] (Far.) An eruption
on the hind leg of a horse. [Written also sellanders, and sellenders.]

    On the inside of the hock, or a little below it, as well as at the
    bend of the knee, there is occasionally a scurfy eruption called
    "mallenders" in the fore leg, and "sallenders" in the hind leg.


Youatt.

Sal"let (sl"lt), n. [F. salade, Sp. celada, or It. celata, fr. L.
(cassis) caelata, fr. caelare, caelatum, to engrave in relief. So
called from the figures engraved upon it.] A light kind of helmet, with
or without a visor, introduced during the 15th century. [Written also
salade.]

    Then he must have a sallet wherewith his head may be saved.


Latimer.

{ Sal"let, Sal"let*ing }, n. Salad. [Obs.] Shak.

Sal"li*ance (?), n. Salience. [Obs.]

Sal"low (sl"l), n. [OE. salwe, AS. sealh; akin to OHG. salaha, G.
salweide, Icel. selja, L. salix, Ir. sail, saileach, Gael. seileach, W.
helyg, Gr. "eli`kh.] 1. The willow; willow twigs. [Poetic] Tennyson.

    And bend the pliant sallow to a shield.


Fawkes.

    The sallow knows the basketmaker's thumb.


Emerson.

2. (Bot.) A name given to certain species of willow, especially those
which do not have flexible shoots, as Salix caprea, S. cinerea, etc.

Sallow thorn (Bot.), a European thorny shrub (Hippophae rhamnoides)
much like an Elæagnus. The yellow berries are sometimes used for making
jelly, and the plant affords a yellow dye.

Sal"low, a. [Compar. Sallower (?); superl. Sallowest.] [AS. salu; akin
to D. zaluw, OHG. salo, Icel. sölr yellow.] Having a yellowish color;
of a pale, sickly color, tinged with yellow; as, a sallow skin. Shak.

Sal"low, v. t. To tinge with sallowness. [Poetic]

    July breathes hot, sallows the crispy fields.


Lowell.

Sal"low*ish, a. Somewhat sallow. Dickens.

Sal"low*ness (?), n. The quality or condition of being sallow. Addison.

Sal"ly (sl"l), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sallied (-ld); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sallying.] [F. saillir, fr. L. salire to leap, spring, akin to Gr.
"a`llesqai; cf. Skr. s to go, to flow. Cf. Salient, Assail, Assault,
Exult, Insult, Saltation, Saltire.] To leap or rush out; to burst
forth; to issue suddenly; as a body of troops from a fortified place to
attack besiegers; to make a sally.

    They break the truce, and sally out by night.


Dryden.

    The foe retires, -- she heads the sallying host.


Byron.

Sal"ly, n.; pl. Sallies (#). [F. saillie, fr. saillir. See Sally, v.]
1. A leaping forth; a darting; a spring.

2. A rushing or bursting forth; a quick issue; a sudden eruption;
specifically, an issuing of troops from a place besieged to attack the
besiegers; a sortie.

    Sallies were made by the Spaniards, but they were beaten in with
    loss.


Bacon.

3. An excursion from the usual track; range; digression; deviation.

    Every one shall know a country better that makes often sallies into
    it, and traverses it up and down, than he that . . . goes still
    round in the same track.


Locke.

4. A flight of fancy, liveliness, wit, or the like; a flashing forth of
a quick and active mind.

    The unaffected mirth with which she enjoyed his sallies.


Sir W. Scott.

5. Transgression of the limits of soberness or steadiness; act of
levity; wild gayety; frolic; escapade.

    The excursion was esteemed but a sally of youth.


Sir H. Wotton.

Sally port. (a) (Fort.) A postern gate, or a passage underground, from
the inner to the outer works, to afford free egress for troops in a
sortie. (b) (Naval) A large port on each quarter of a fireship, for the
escape of the men into boats when the train is fired; a large port in
an old-fashioned three-decker or a large modern ironclad.

Sal"ly Lunn" (?). [From a woman, Sally Lunn, who is said to have first
made the cakes, and sold them in the streets of Bath, Eng.] A tea cake
slighty sweetened, and raised with yeast, baked in the form of biscuits
or in a thin loaf, and eaten hot with butter.

Sal"ly*man (?), n. (Zoöl.) The velella; -- called also saleeman.

Salm (?), n. Psalm. [Obs2E] Piers Plowman.

Sal`ma*gun"di (?), n. [F. salmigondis, of uncertain origin; perhaps
from L. salgama condita, pl.; salgama pickles + condita preserved (see
Condite); or from the Countess Salmagondi, lady of honor to Maria de
Medici, who is said to have invented it; or cf. It. salame salt meat,
and F. salmis a ragout.] 1. A mixture of chopped meat and pickled
herring, with oil, vinegar, pepper, and onions. Johnson.

2. Hence, a mixture of various ingredients; an olio or medley; a
potpourri; a miscellany. W. Irving.

Sal"mi (?), n. (Cookery) Same as Salmis.

Sal"mi*ac (?), n. [Cf. F. salmiac, G. salmiak.] (Old Chem.) Sal
ammoniac. See under Sal.

||Sal`mis" (?), n. [F.] (Cookery) A ragout of partly roasted game
||stewed with sauce, wine, bread, and condiments suited to provoke
||appetite.

Salm"on (sm"n), n.; pl. Salmons (-nz) or (collectively) Salmon. [OE.
saumoun, salmon, F. saumon, fr. L. salmo, salmonis, perhaps from salire
to leap. Cf. Sally, v.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of fishes
of the genus Salmo and allied genera. The common salmon (Salmo salar)
of Northern Europe and Eastern North America, and the California
salmon, or quinnat, are the most important species. They are
extensively preserved for food. See Quinnat.

The salmons ascend rivers and penetrate to their head streams to spawn.
They are remarkably strong fishes, and will even leap over considerable
falls which lie in the way of their progress. The common salmon has
been known to grow to the weight of seventy-five pounds; more generally
it is from fifteen to twenty-five pounds. Young salmon are called parr,
peal, smolt, and grilse. Among the true salmons are: Black salmon, or
Lake salmon, the namaycush. -- Dog salmon, a salmon of Western North
America (Oncorhynchus keta). -- Humpbacked salmon, a Pacific-coast
salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha). -- King salmon, the quinnat. --
Landlocked salmon, a variety of the common salmon (var. Sebago), long
confined in certain lakes in consequence of obstructions that prevented
it from returning to the sea. This last is called also dwarf salmon.

Among fishes of other families which are locally and erroneously called
salmon are: the pike perch, called jack salmon; the spotted, or
southern, squeteague; the cabrilla, called kelp salmon; young pollock,
called sea salmon; and the California yellowtail.

2. A reddish yellow or orange color, like the flesh of the salmon.

Salmon berry (Bot.), a large red raspberry growing from Alaska to
California, the fruit of the Rubus Nutkanus. -- Salmon killer (Zoöl.),
a stickleback (Gasterosteus cataphractus) of Western North America and
Northern Asia. -- Salmon ladder, Salmon stair. See Fish ladder, under
Fish. -- Salmon peel, a young salmon. -- Salmon pipe, a certain device
for catching salmon. Crabb. -- Salmon trout. (Zoöl.) (a) The European
sea trout (Salmo trutta). It resembles the salmon, but is smaller, and
has smaller and more numerous scales. (b) The American namaycush. (c) A
name that is also applied locally to the adult black spotted trout
(Salmo purpuratus), and to the steel head and other large trout of the
Pacific coast.

Salm"on, a. Of a reddish yellow or orange color, like that of the flesh
of the salmon.

Salm"on*et (?), n. [Cf. Samlet.] (Zoöl.) A salmon of small size; a
samlet.

Sal"mon*oid (?), a. [Salmon + -oid.] (Zoöl.) Like, or pertaining to,
the Salmonidæ, a family of fishes including the trout and salmon. -- n.
Any fish of the family Salmonidæ.

Sal"o*gen (?), n. [L. sal salt + -gen.] (Chem.) A halogen. [Obs.]

Sal"ol (?), n. [Salicylic + - ol.] (Chem.) A white crystalline
substance consisting of phenol salicylate.

sa*lom"e*ter (?), n. See Salimeter.

Sa*lom"e*try (?), n. Salimetry.

||Sa`lon" (?), n. [F. See Saloon.] An apartment for the reception of
||company; hence, in the plural, fashionable parties; circles of
||fashionable society.

Sa*loon" (s*ln"), n. [F. salon (cf. It. salone), fr. F. salle a large
room, a hall, of German or Dutch origin; cf. OHG. sal house, hall, G.
saal; akin to AS. sæl, sele, D. zaal, Icel. salr, Goth. saljan to
dwell, and probably to L. solum ground. Cf. Sole of the foot, Soil
ground, earth.] 1. A spacious and elegant apartment for the reception
of company or for works of art; a hall of reception, esp. a hall for
public entertainments or amusements; a large room or parlor; as, the
saloon of a steamboat.

    The gilden saloons in which the first magnates of the realm . . .
    gave banquets and balls.


Macaulay.

2. Popularly, a public room for specific uses; esp., a barroom or
grogshop; as, a drinking saloon; an eating saloon; a dancing saloon.

    We hear of no hells, or low music halls, or low dancing saloons [at
    Athens.]


J. P. Mahaffy.

Sa*loop" (s*lp"), n. An aromatic drink prepared from sassafras bark and
other ingredients, at one time much used in London. J. Smith (Dict.
Econ. Plants).

Saloop bush (Bot.), an Australian shrub (Rhagodia hastata) of the
Goosefoot family, used for fodder.

Salp (slp), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of Salpa, or of the family Salpidæ.

||Sal"pa (sl"p), n.; pl. L. Salpæ (-p), E. Salpas (-pz). [NL.: cf. L.
||salpa a kind of stockfish.] (Zoöl.) A genus of transparent, tubular,
||free-swimming oceanic tunicates found abundantly in all the warmer
||latitudes. See Illustration in Appendix.

Each species exists in two distinct forms, one of which lives solitary,
and produces, by budding from an internal organ, a series of the other
kind. These are united together, side by side, so as to form a chain,
or cluster, often of large size. Each of the individuals composing the
chain carries a single egg, which develops into the solitary kind.

{ Sal"pi*an (?), Sal"pid (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) A salpa.

Sal"pi*con (?), n. [F. salpicon, Sp. salpicon.] Chopped meat, bread,
etc., used to stuff legs of veal or other joints; stuffing; farce.
Bacon.

||Sal`pin*gi"tis (?), n. [NL. See Salpinx, and -itis.] (Med.)
||Inflammation of the salpinx.

||Sal"pinx (?), n. [NL., from Gr. &?;, &?;, a trumpet.] (Old Anat.) The
||Eustachian tube, or the Fallopian tube.

Sal"sa*fy (?), n. (Bot.) See Salsify.

Sal`sa*men*ta"ri*ous (?), a. [L. salsamentarius, fr. salsamentum brine,
pickled fish, fr. salsus salted, p. p. of salire to salt.] Salt;
salted; saline. [R.]

Salse (?), n. [F.] A mud volcano, the water of which is often
impregnated with salts, whence the name.

Sal"si*fy (?; 277), n. [F. salsifis.] (Bot.) See Oyster plant (a),
under Oyster.

Sal"so-ac`id (?), a. [L. salsus salted, salt + acidus acid.] Having a
taste compounded of saltness and acidity; both salt and acid. [R.]

Sal`so"da (?), n. See Sal soda, under Sal.

||Sal"so*la (?), n. [NL., fr. L. salsus salt, because they contain
||alkaline salts.] (Bot.) A genus of plants including the glasswort.
||See Glasswort.

sal*su"gi*nous (?), a. [L. salsugo, -ginis, saltness, from salsus
salted, salt: cf. F. salsugineux.] (Bot.) Growing in brackish places or
in salt marshes.

Salt (?), n. [AS. sealt; akin to OS. & OFries. salt, D. zout, G. salz,
Icel., Sw., & Dan. salt, L. sal, Gr. &?;, Russ. sole, Ir. & Gael.
salann, W. halen, of unknown origin. Cf. Sal, Salad, Salary, Saline,
Sauce, Sausage.] 1. The chloride of sodium, a substance used for
seasoning food, for the preservation of meat, etc. It is found native
in the earth, and is also produced, by evaporation and crystallization,
from sea water and other water impregnated with saline particles.

2. Hence, flavor; taste; savor; smack; seasoning.

    Though we are justices and doctors and churchmen . . . we have some
    salt of our youth in us.


Shak.

3. Hence, also, piquancy; wit; sense; as, Attic salt.

4. A dish for salt at table; a saltcellar.

    I out and bought some things; among others, a dozen of silver
    salts.


Pepys.

5. A sailor; -- usually qualified by old. [Colloq.]

    Around the door are generally to be seen, laughing and gossiping,
    clusters of old salts.


Hawthorne.

6. (Chem.) The neutral compound formed by the union of an acid and a
base; thus, sulphuric acid and iron form the salt sulphate of iron or
green vitriol.

Except in case of ammonium salts, accurately speaking, it is the acid
radical which unites with the base or basic radical, with the
elimination of hydrogen, of water, or of analogous compounds as side
products. In the case of diacid and triacid bases, and of dibasic and
tribasic acids, the mutual neutralization may vary in degree, producing
respectively basic, neutral, or acid salts. See Phrases below.

7. Fig.: That which preserves from corruption or error; that which
purifies; a corrective; an antiseptic; also, an allowance or deduction;
as, his statements must be taken with a grain of salt.

    Ye are the salt of the earth.


Matt. v. 13.

8. pl. Any mineral salt used as an aperient or cathartic, especially
Epsom salts, Rochelle salt, or Glauber's salt.

9. pl. Marshes flooded by the tide. [Prov. Eng.]

Above the salt, Below the salt, phrases which have survived the old
custom, in the houses of people of rank, of placing a large saltcellar
near the middle of a long table, the places above which were assigned
to the guests of distinction, and those below to dependents, inferiors,
and poor relations. See Saltfoot.

    His fashion is not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in
    clothes. He never drinks below the salt.


B. Jonson.

-- Acid salt (Chem.) (a) A salt derived from an acid which has several
replaceable hydrogen atoms which are only partially exchanged for
metallic atoms or basic radicals; as, acid potassium sulphate is an
acid salt. (b) A salt, whatever its constitution, which merely gives an
acid reaction; thus, copper sulphate, which is composed of a strong
acid united with a weak base, is an acid salt in this sense, though
theoretically it is a neutral salt. -- Alkaline salt (Chem.), a salt
which gives an alkaline reaction, as sodium carbonate. -- Amphid salt
(Old Chem.), a salt of the oxy type, formerly regarded as composed of
two oxides, an acid and a basic oxide. [Obsolescent] -- Basic salt
(Chem.) (a) A salt which contains more of the basic constituent than is
required to neutralize the acid. (b) An alkaline salt. -- Binary salt
(Chem.), a salt of the oxy type conveniently regarded as composed of
two ingredients (analogously to a haloid salt), viz., a metal and an
acid radical. -- Double salt (Chem.), a salt regarded as formed by the
union of two distinct salts, as common alum, potassium aluminium
sulphate. See under Double. -- Epsom salts. See in the Vocabulary. --
Essential salt (Old Chem.), a salt obtained by crystallizing plant
juices. -- Ethereal salt. (Chem.) See under Ethereal. -- Glauber's salt
or salts. See in Vocabulary. -- Haloid salt (Chem.), a simple salt of a
halogen acid, as sodium chloride. -- Microcosmic salt. (Chem.). See
under Microcosmic. -- Neutral salt. (Chem.) (a) A salt in which the
acid and base (in theory) neutralize each other. (b) A salt which gives
a neutral reaction. -- Oxy salt (Chem.), a salt derived from an oxygen
acid. -- Per salt (Old Chem.), a salt supposed to be derived from a
peroxide base or analogous compound. [Obs.] -- Permanent salt, a salt
which undergoes no change on exposure to the air. -- Proto salt
(Chem.), a salt derived from a protoxide base or analogous compound. --
Rochelle salt. See under Rochelle. -- Salt of amber (Old Chem.),
succinic acid. -- Salt of colcothar (Old Chem.), green vitriol, or
sulphate of iron. -- Salt of hartshorn. (Old Chem.) (a) Sal ammoniac,
or ammonium chloride. (b) Ammonium carbonate. Cf. Spirit of hartshorn,
under Hartshorn. -- Salt of lemons. (Chem.) See Salt of sorrel, below.
-- Salt of Saturn (Old Chem.), sugar of lead; lead acetate; -- the
alchemical name of lead being Saturn. -- Salt of Seignette. Same as
Rochelle salt. -- Salt of soda (Old Chem.), sodium carbonate. -- Salt
of sorrel (Old Chem.), acid potassium oxalate, or potassium
quadroxalate, used as a solvent for ink stains; -- so called because
found in the sorrel, or Oxalis. Also sometimes inaccurately called salt
of lemon. -- Salt of tartar (Old Chem.), potassium carbonate; -- so
called because formerly made by heating cream of tartar, or potassium
tartrate. [Obs.] -- Salt of Venus (Old Chem.), blue vitriol; copper
sulphate; -- the alchemical name of copper being Venus. -- Salt of
wisdom. See Alembroth. -- Sedative salt (Old Med. Chem.), boric acid.
-- Sesqui salt (Chem.), a salt derived from a sesquioxide base or
analogous compound. -- Spirit of salt. (Chem.) See under Spirit. --
Sulpho salt (Chem.), a salt analogous to an oxy salt, but containing
sulphur in place of oxygen.

Salt (?), a. [Compar. Salter (?); superl. Saltest.] [AS. sealt, salt.
See Salt, n.] 1. Of or relating to salt; abounding in, or containing,
salt; prepared or preserved with, or tasting of, salt; salted; as, salt
beef; salt water. "Salt tears." Chaucer.

2. Overflowed with, or growing in, salt water; as, a salt marsh; salt
grass.

3. Fig.: Bitter; sharp; pungent.

    I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me.


Shak.

4. Fig.: Salacious; lecherous; lustful. Shak.

Salt acid (Chem.), hydrochloric acid. -- Salt block, an apparatus for
evaporating brine; a salt factory. Knight. -- Salt bottom, a flat piece
of ground covered with saline efflorescences. [Western U.S.] Bartlett.
-- Salt cake (Chem.), the white caked mass, consisting of sodium
sulphate, which is obtained as the product of the first stage in the
manufacture of soda, according to Leblanc's process. -- Salt fish. (a)
Salted fish, especially cod, haddock, and similar fishes that have been
salted and dried for food. (b) A marine fish. -- Salt garden, an
arrangement for the natural evaporation of sea water for the production
of salt, employing large shallow basins excavated near the seashore. --
Salt gauge, an instrument used to test the strength of brine; a
salimeter. -- Salt horse, salted beef. [Slang] -- Salt junk, hard salt
beef for use at sea. [Slang] -- Salt lick. See Lick, n. -- Salt marsh,
grass land subject to the overflow of salt water. -- Salt-marsh
caterpillar (Zoöl.), an American bombycid moth (Spilosoma acræa which
is very destructive to the salt-marsh grasses and to other crops.
Called also woolly bear. See Illust. under Moth, Pupa, and Woolly bear,
under Woolly. -- Salt-marsh fleabane (Bot.), a strong-scented composite
herb (Pluchea camphorata) with rayless purplish heads, growing in salt
marshes. -- Salt-marsh hen (Zoöl.), the clapper rail. See under Rail.
-- Salt- marsh terrapin (Zoöl.), the diamond- back. -- Salt mine, a
mine where rock salt is obtained. -- Salt pan. (a) A large pan used for
making salt by evaporation; also, a shallow basin in the ground where
salt water is evaporated by the heat of the sun. (b) pl. Salt works. --
Salt pit, a pit where salt is obtained or made. -- Salt rising, a kind
of yeast in which common salt is a principal ingredient. [U.S.] -- Salt
raker, one who collects salt in natural salt ponds, or inclosures from
the sea. -- Salt sedative (Chem.), boracic acid. [Obs.] -- Salt spring,
a spring of salt water. -- Salt tree (Bot.), a small leguminous tree
(Halimodendron argenteum) growing in the salt plains of the Caspian
region and in Siberia. -- Salt water, water impregnated with salt, as
that of the ocean and of certain seas and lakes; sometimes, also,
tears.

    Mine eyes are full of tears, I can not see; And yet salt water
    blinds them not so much But they can see a sort of traitors here.


Shak.

-- Salt-water sailor, an ocean mariner. -- Salt-water tailor. (Zoöl.)
See Bluefish.

Salt, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Salted; p. pr. & vb. n. Salting.] 1. To
sprinkle, impregnate, or season with salt; to preserve with salt or in
brine; to supply with salt; as, to salt fish, beef, or pork; to salt
cattle.

2. To fill with salt between the timbers and planks, as a ship, for the
preservation of the timber.

To salt a mine, to artfully deposit minerals in a mine in order to
deceive purchasers regarding its value. [Cant] -- To salt away, To salt
down, to prepare with, or pack in, salt for preserving, as meat, eggs,
etc.; hence, colloquially, to save, lay up, or invest sagely, as money.

Salt (?), v. i. To deposit salt as a saline solution; as, the brine
begins to salt.

Salt (?), n. [L. saltus, fr. salire to leap.] The act of leaping or
jumping; a leap. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Sal"tant (?), a. [L. saltans, p. pr. of saltare to dance, v. intens.
fr. salire to leap: cf. F. sautant. See Sally, v.] 1. Leaping; jumping;
dancing.

2. (Her.) In a leaping position; springing forward; -- applied
especially to the squirrel, weasel, and rat, also to the cat,
greyhound, monkey, etc.

||Sal`ta*rel"la (?), n. See Saltarello.

||Sal`ta*rel"lo (?), n. [It., fr. L. saltare to jump.] A popular
||Italian dance in quick 3-4 or 6-8 time, running mostly in triplets,
||but with a hop step at the beginning of each measure. See Tarantella.

Sal"tate (?), v. i. [See Saltant.] To leap or dance. [R.]

Sal*ta"tion (?), n. [L. saltatio: cf. F. saltation.] 1. A leaping or
jumping.

    Continued his saltation without pause.


Sir W. Scott.

2. Beating or palpitation; as, the saltation of the great artery.

3. (Biol.) An abrupt and marked variation in the condition or
appearance of a species; a sudden modification which may give rise to
new races.

    We greatly suspect that nature does make considerable jumps in the
    way of variation now and then, and that these saltations give rise
    to some of the gaps which appear to exist in the series of known
    forms.


Huxley.

||Sal`ta*to"ri*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A division of Orthoptera
||including grasshoppers, locusts, and crickets.

Sal`ta*to"ri*al (?), a. 1. Relating to leaping; saltatory; as,
saltatorial exercises.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) Same as Saltatorious. (b) Of or pertaining to the
Saltatoria.

Sal`ta*to"ri*ous (?), a. Capable of leaping; formed for leaping;
saltatory; as, a saltatorious insect or leg.

Sal"ta*to"ry (?), a. [L. saltatorius. See Saltant, and cf. Saltire.]
Leaping or dancing; having the power of, or used in, leaping or
dancing.

Saltatory evolution (Biol.), a theory of evolution which holds that the
transmutation of species is not always gradual, but that there may come
sudden and marked variations. See Saltation. -- Saltatory spasm (Med.),
an affection in which pressure of the foot on a floor causes the
patient to spring into the air, so as to make repeated involuntary
motions of hopping and jumping. J. Ross.

Salt"bush` (?), n. (Bot.) An Australian plant (Atriplex nummularia) of
the Goosefoot family.

Salt"cat` (?), n. A mixture of salt, coarse meal, lime, etc.,
attractive to pigeons.

Salt"cel*lar (?), n. [OE. saltsaler; salt + F. salière saltcellar, from
L. sal salt. See Salt, and cf. Salary.] Formerly a large vessel, now a
small vessel of glass or other material, used for holding salt on the
table.

Salt"er (?), n. One who makes, sells, or applies salt; one who salts
meat or fish.

Salt"ern (?), n. A building or place where salt is made by boiling or
by evaporation; salt works.

Salt"foot` (?), n. A large saltcellar formerly placed near the center
of the table. The superior guests were seated above the saltfoot.

Salt"-green (?), a. Sea-green in color. Shak.

Salt"ie (?), n. (Zoöl.) The European dab.

Sal"tier (?), n. See Saltire.

||Sal`ti*gra"dæ (?), n. pl. [NL. See Saltigrade.] (Zoöl.) A tribe of
||spiders including those which lie in wait and leap upon their prey;
||the leaping spiders.

Sal"ti*grade (?), a. [L. saltus a leap + gradi to walk, go: cf. F.
saltigrade.] (Zoöl.) Having feet or legs formed for leaping.

Sal"ti*grade, n. (Zoöl.) One of the Saltigradæ, a tribe of spiders
which leap to seize their prey.

Sal`tim*ban"co (?), n. [It., literally, one who leaps or mounts upon a
bench; saltare to leap + in in, upon + banco a bench.] A mountebank; a
quack. [Obs.] [Written also santinbanco.]

    Saltimbancos, quacksalvers, and charlatans.


Sir T. Browne.

Salt"ing (?), n. 1. The act of sprinkling, impregnating, or furnishing,
with salt.

2. A salt marsh.

Sal"tire (?), n. [F. sautoir, fr. LL. saltatorium a sort of stirrup,
fr. L. saltatorius saltatory. See Saltatory, Sally, v.] (Her.) A St.
Andrew's cross, or cross in the form of an X, -- one of the honorable
ordinaries.

Sal"tire*wise` (?), adv. (Her.) In the manner of a saltire; -- said
especially of the blazoning of a shield divided by two lines drawn in
the direction of a bend and a bend sinister, and crossing at the
center.

Salt"ish (?), a. Somewhat salt. -- Salt"ish*ly, adv. -- Salt"ish*ness,
n.

Salt"less, a. Destitute of salt; insipid.

Salt"ly, adv. With taste of salt; in a salt manner.

Salt"mouth` (?), n. A wide-mouthed bottle with glass stopper for
holding chemicals, especially crystallized salts.

Salt"ness (?), n. The quality or state of being salt, or state of being
salt, or impregnated with salt; salt taste; as, the saltness of sea
water.

{ Salt`pe"ter, Salt`pe"tre }, (&?;), n. [F. salpêtre, NL. sal petrae,
literally, rock salt, or stone salt; so called because it exudes from
rocks or walls. See Salt, and Petrify.] (Chem.) Potassium nitrate;
niter; a white crystalline substance, KNO3, having a cooling saline
taste, obtained by leaching from certain soils in which it is produced
by the process of nitrification (see Nitrification, 2). It is a strong
oxidizer, is the chief constituent of gunpowder, and is also used as an
antiseptic in curing meat, and in medicine as a diuretic, diaphoretic,
and refrigerant.

Chili salpeter (Chem.), sodium nitrate (distinguished from potassium
nitrate, or true salpeter), a white crystalline substance, NaNO3,
having a cooling, saline, slightly bitter taste. It is obtained by
leaching the soil of the rainless districts of Chili and Peru. It is
deliquescent and cannot be used in gunpowder, but is employed in the
production of nitric acid. Called also cubic niter. -- Saltpeter acid
(Chem.), nitric acid; -- sometimes so called because made from
saltpeter.

Salt`pe"trous (?), a. [Cf. F. salpêtreux.] Pertaining to saltpeter, or
partaking of its qualities; impregnated with saltpeter. [Obs.]

Salt" rheum (?). (Med.) A popular name, esp. in the United States, for
various cutaneous eruptions, particularly for those of eczema. See
Eczema.

Salt"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) A name given to several plants which grow on
the seashore, as the Batis maritima, and the glasswort. See Glasswort.

Black saltwort, the sea milkwort.

Salt"y (?), a. Somewhat salt; saltish.

Sa*lu"bri*ous (?), a. [L. salubris, or saluber, fr. salus health; akin
to salvus safe, sound, well. See Safe.] Favorable to health; healthful;
promoting health; as, salubrious air, water, or climate.

Syn. -- Healthful; wholesome; healthy; salutary.

-- Sa-lu"bri*ous*ly, adv. -- Sa*lu"bri*ous*ness, n.

Sa*lu"bri*ty (?), n. [L. salubritas: cf. F. salubrité See Salubrious.]
The quality of being salubrious; favorableness to the preservation of
health; salubriousness; wholesomeness; healthfulness; as, the salubrity
of the air, of a country, or a climate. "A sweet, dry smell of
salubrity." G. W. Cable.

Sa*lue" (?), v. t. [F. saluer. See Salute.] To salute. [Obs.]

    There was no "good day" and no saluyng.


Chaucer.

Sal"u*ta*ry (?), a. [L. salutaris, from salus, -utis, health, safety:
cf. F. salutaire. See Salubrious.] 1. Wholesome; healthful; promoting
health; as, salutary exercise.

2. Promotive of, or contributing to, some beneficial purpose;
beneficial; advantageous; as, a salutary design.

Syn. -- Wholesome; healthful; salubrious; beneficial; useful;
advantageous; profitable.

-- Sal"u*ta*ri*ly (#), adv. -- Sal"u*ta*ri*ness, n.

Sal`u*ta"tion (?), n. [L. salutatio: cf. F. salutation. See Salute.]
The act of saluting, or paying respect or reverence, by the customary
words or actions; the act of greeting, or expressing good will or
courtesy; also, that which is uttered or done in saluting or greeting.

    In all public meetings or private addresses, use those forms of
    salutation, reverence, and decency usual amongst the most sober
    persons.


Jer. Taylor.

Syn. -- Greeting; salute; address. -- Salutation, Greeting, Salute.
Greeting is the general word for all manner of expressions of
recognition, agreeable or otherwise, made when persons meet or
communicate with each other. A greeting may be hearty and loving,
chilling and offensive, or merely formal, as in the opening sentence of
legal documents. Salutation more definitely implies a wishing well, and
is used of expressions at parting as well as at meeting. It is used
especially of uttered expressions of good will. Salute, while formerly
and sometimes still in the sense of either greeting or salutation, is
now used specifically to denote a conventional demonstration not
expressed in words. The guests received a greeting which relieved their
embarrassment, offered their salutations in well-chosen terms, and when
they retired, as when they entered, made a deferential salute.

    Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the
    synagogues, and greetings in the markets.


Luke xi. 43.

    When Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her
    womb.


Luke i. 41.

    I shall not trouble my reader with the first salutes of our three
    friends.


Addison.

Sa*lu`ta*to"ri*an (?), n. The student who pronounces the salutatory
oration at the annual Commencement or like exercises of a college, --
an honor commonly assigned to that member of the graduating class who
ranks second in scholarship. [U.S.]

Sa*lu"ta*to*ri*ly (?), adv. By way of salutation.

Sa*lu"ta*to*ry (?), a. [L. salutatorius. See Salute.] Containing or
expressing salutations; speaking a welcome; greeting; -- applied
especially to the oration which introduces the exercises of the
Commencements, or similar public exhibitions, in American colleges.

Sa*lu"ta*to*ry, n. 1. A place for saluting or greeting; a vestibule; a
porch. [Obs.] Milton.

2. (American Colleges) The salutatory oration.

Sa*lute" (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saluted; p. pr. & vb. n. Saluting.]
[L. salutare, salutatum, from salus, -utis, health, safety. See
Salubrious.] 1. To address, as with expressions of kind wishes and
courtesy; to greet; to hail.

    I salute you with this kingly title.


Shak.

2. Hence, to give a sign of good will; to compliment by an act or
ceremony, as a kiss, a bow, etc.

    You have the prettiest tip of a finger . . . I must take the
    freedom to salute it.


Addison.

3. (Mil. & Naval) To honor, as some day, person, or nation, by a
discharge of cannon or small arms, by dipping colors, by cheers, etc.

4. To promote the welfare and safety of; to benefit; to gratify. [Obs.]
"If this salute my blood a jot." Shak.

Sa*lute" (?), n. [Cf. F. salut. See Salute, v.] 1. The act of saluting,
or expressing kind wishes or respect; salutation; greeting.

2. A sign, token, or ceremony, expressing good will, compliment, or
respect, as a kiss, a bow, etc. Tennyson.

3. (Mil. & Naval) A token of respect or honor for some distinguished or
official personage, for a foreign vessel or flag, or for some festival
or event, as by presenting arms, by a discharge of cannon, volleys of
small arms, dipping the colors or the topsails, etc.

Sa*lut"er (?), n. One who salutes.

Sal`u*tif"er*ous (?), a. [L. salutifer; salus, -utis, health + ferre to
bring.] Bringing health; healthy; salutary; beneficial; as,
salutiferous air. [R.]

    Innumerable powers, all of them salutiferous.


Cudworth.

Syn. -- Healthful; healthy; salutary; salubrious.

Sal`u*tif"er*ous*ly, adv. Salutarily. [R.]

Sal`va*bil"i*ty (?), n. The quality or condition of being salvable;
salvableness. [R.]

    In the Latin scheme of redemption, salvability was not possible
    outside the communion of the visible organization.


A. V. G. Allen.

Sal"va*ble (?), a. [L. salvare to save, from salvus safe. Cf. Savable.]
Capable of being saved; admitting of salvation. Dr. H. More.

-- Sal"va*ble*ness, n. -- Sal"va*bly, adv.

Sal"vage (?; 48), n. [F. salvage, OF. salver to save, F. sauver, fr. L.
salvare. See Save.] 1. The act of saving a vessel, goods, or life, from
perils of the sea.

    Salvage of life from a British ship, or a foreign ship in British
    waters, ranks before salvage of goods.


Encyc. Brit.

2. (Maritime Law) (a) The compensation allowed to persons who
voluntarily assist in saving a ship or her cargo from peril. (b) That
part of the property that survives the peril and is saved. Kent. Abbot.

Sal"vage, a. & n. Savage. [Obs.] Spenser.

Sal*va"tion (?), n. [OE. salvacioun, sauvacion, F. salvation, fr. L.
salvatio, fr. salvare to save. See Save.] 1. The act of saving;
preservation or deliverance from destruction, danger, or great
calamity.

2. (Theol.) The redemption of man from the bondage of sin and liability
to eternal death, and the conferring on him of everlasting happiness.

    To earn salvation for the sons of men.


Milton.

    Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation.


2. Cor. vii. 10.

3. Saving power; that which saves.

    Fear ye not; stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which
    he will show to you to-day.


Ex. xiv. 13.

Salvation Army, an organization for prosecuting the work of Christian
evangelization, especially among the degraded populations of cities. It
is virtually a new sect founded in London in 1861 by William Booth. The
evangelists, male and female, have military titles according to rank,
that of the chief being "General." They wear a uniform, and in their
phraseology and mode of work adopt a quasi military style.

Sal*va"tion*ist, n. An evangelist, a member, or a recruit, of the
Salvation Army.

Sal"va*to*ry (?), n. [LL. salvatorium, fr. salvare to save.] A place
where things are preserved; a repository. [R.] Sir M. Hale.

||Sal"ve (?), interj. [L., hail, God save you, imperat. of salvere to
||be well. Cf. Salvo a volley.] Hail!

Sal"ve (? or ?), v. t. To say "Salve" to; to greet; to salute. [Obs.]

    By this that stranger knight in presence came, And goodly salved
    them.


Spenser.

Salve (?; 277), n. [AS. sealf ointment; akin to LG. salwe, D. zalve,
zalf, OHG. salba, Dan. salve, Sw. salfva, Goth. salbn to anoint, and
probably to Gr. (Hesychius) &?; oil, &?; butter, Skr. sarpis clarified
butter. &radic;155, 291.] 1. An adhesive composition or substance to be
applied to wounds or sores; a healing ointment. Chaucer.

2. A soothing remedy or antidote.

    Counsel or consolation we may bring. Salve to thy sores.


Milton.

Salve bug (Zoöl.), a large, stout isopod crustacean (Æga psora),
parasitic on the halibut and codfish, -- used by fishermen in the
preparation of a salve. It becomes about two inches in length.

Salve, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Salved (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Salving.] [AS.
sealfian to anoint. See Salve, n.] 1. To heal by applications or
medicaments; to cure by remedial treatment; to apply salve to; as, to
salve a wound. Shak.

2. To heal; to remedy; to cure; to make good; to soothe, as with an
ointment, especially by some device, trick, or quibble; to gloss over.

    But Ebranck salved both their infamies With noble deeds.


Spenser.

    What may we do, then, to salve this seeming inconsistence?


Milton.

Salve (?), v. t. & i. [See Salvage] To save, as a ship or goods, from
the perils of the sea. [Recent]

Salv"er (?), n. One who salves, or uses salve as a remedy; hence, a
quacksalver, or quack. [Obs.]

Sal"ver (?), n. [Cf. Salvage.] A salvor. Skeat.

Sal"ver (?), n. [Sp. salva pregustation, the tasting of viands before
they are served, salver, fr. salvar to save, to taste, to prove the
food or drink of nobles, from L. salvare to save. See Save.] A tray or
waiter on which anything is presented.

Sal"ver-shaped` (?), a. (Bot.) Tubular, with a spreading border. See
Hypocraterimorphous.

||Sal"vi*a (?), n. [L., sage.] (Bot.) A genus of plants including the
||sage. See Sage.

Sal*vif"ic (?), a. [L. salficus saving; salvus saved, safe + facere to
make.] Tending to save or secure safety. [Obs.]

Sal"vo (?), n.; pl. Salvos (#). [L. salvo jure, literally, the right
being reserved. See Safe.] An exception; a reservation; an excuse.

    They admit many salvos, cautions, and reservations.


Eikon Basilike.

Sal"vo, n. [F. salve a discharge of heavy cannon, a volley, L. salve
hail, imperat. of salvere to be well, akin to salvus well. See Safe.]
1. (Mil.) A concentrated fire from pieces of artillery, as in
endeavoring to make a break in a fortification; a volley.

2. A salute paid by a simultaneous, or nearly simultaneous, firing of a
number of cannon.

Sal"vor (?), n. [See Salvation, Save] (Law) One who assists in saving a
ship or goods at sea, without being under special obligation to do so.
Wheaton.

Sam (?), adv. [AS. same. See Same, a.] Together. [Obs.] "All in that
city sam." Spenser.

Sa*ma"ra (? or ?), n. [L. samara, samera, the seed of the elm.] (Bot.)
A dry, indehiscent, usually one-seeded, winged fruit, as that of the
ash, maple, and elm; a key or key fruit.

Sam"are (?), n. See Simar.

Sa*mar"i*tan (?), a. [L. Samaritanus.] Of or pertaining to Samaria, in
Palestine. -- n. A native or inhabitant of Samaria; also, the language
of Samaria.

Sa*ma"ri*um (?), n. [NL., fr. E. samarskite.] (Chem.) A rare metallic
element of doubtful identity.

Samarium was discovered, by means of spectrum analysis, in certain
minerals (samarskite, cerite, etc.), in which it is associated with
other elements of the earthy group. It has been confounded with the
doubtful elements decipium, philippium, etc., and is possibly a complex
mixture of elements not as yet clearly identified. Symbol Sm.
Provisional atomic weight 150.2.

Sam"a*roid (?; 277), a. [Samara + -oid.] (Bot.) Resembling a samara, or
winged seed vessel.

Sa*mar"ra (?), n. See Simar.

Sa*mar"skite (?), a. [After Samarski, a Russian.] (Min.) A rare mineral
having a velvet-black color and submetallic luster. It is a niobate of
uranium, iron, and the yttrium and cerium metals.

Sam"bo, n. [Sp. zambo, sambo.] A colloquial or humorous appellation for
a negro; sometimes, the offspring of a black person and a mulatto; a
zambo.

Sam"boo (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sambur.

||Sam*bu"cus (?), n. [L., an elder tree.] (Bot.) A genus of shrubs and
||trees; the elder.

Sam"buke (?), n. [L. sambuca, Gr. &?;.] (Mus.) An ancient stringed
instrument used by the Greeks, the particular construction of which is
unknown.

Sam"bur (?), n. [Hind. smbar, sbar.] (Zoöl.) An East Indian deer (Rusa
Aristotelis) having a mane on its neck. Its antlers have but three
prongs. Called also gerow. The name is applied to other species of the
genus Rusa, as the Bornean sambur (R. equina).

Same (?), a. [AS. same, adv.; akin to OS. sama, samo, adv., OHG. sam,
a., sama, adv., Icel. samr, a., Sw. samme, samma, Dan. samme, Goth.
sama, Russ. samuii, Gr. &?;, Skr. sama, Gr. &?; like, L. simul at the
same time, similis like, and E. some, a., -some. &radic;191. Cf.
Anomalous, Assemble, Homeopathy, Homily, Seem, v. i., Semi-, Similar,
Some.] 1. Not different or other; not another or others; identical;
unchanged.

    Thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.


Ps. cii. 27.

2. Of like kind, species, sort, dimensions, or the like; not differing
in character or in the quality or qualities compared; corresponding;
not discordant; similar; like.

    The ethereal vigor is in all the same.


Dryden.

3. Just mentioned, or just about to be mentioned.

    What ye know, the same do I know.


Job. xiii. 2.

    Do but think how well the same he spends, Who spends his blood his
    country to relieve.


Daniel.

Same is commonly preceded by the, this, or that and is often used
substantively as in the citations above. In a comparative use it is
followed by as or with.

    Bees like the same odors as we do.


Lubbock.

    [He] held the same political opinions with his illustrious friend.


Macaulay.

Same"li*ness (?), n. Sameness, 2. [R.] Bayne.

Same"ness, n. 1. The state of being the same; identity; absence of
difference; near resemblance; correspondence; similarity; as, a
sameness of person, of manner, of sound, of appearance, and the like.
"A sameness of the terms." Bp. Horsley.

2. Hence, want of variety; tedious monotony.

Syn. -- Identity; identicalness; oneness.

Sa*mette" (?), n. See Samite. [Obs.]

Sa"mi*an (?), a. [L. Samius.] Of or pertaining to the island of Samos.

    Fill high the cup with Samian wine.


Byron.

Samian earth, a species of clay from Samos, formerly used in medicine
as an astringent.

Sa"mi*an, n. A native or inhabitant of Samos.

Sa"mi*el (?; 277), n. [Turk. sam- yeli; Ar. samm poison + Turk. yel
wind. Cf. Simoom.] A hot and destructive wind that sometimes blows, in
Turkey, from the desert. It is identical with the simoom of Arabia and
the kamsin of Syria.

Sa"mi*ot (?), a. & n. [Cf. F. samiote.] Samian.

Sa"mite (?), a. [OF. samit, LL. samitum, examitum, from LGr. &?;, &?;
woven with six threads; Gr. &?; six + &?; a thread. See Six, and cf.
Dimity.] A species of silk stuff, or taffeta, generally interwoven with
gold. Tennyson.

    In silken samite she was light arrayed.


Spenser.

Sam"let (?), n. [Cf. Salmonet.] The parr.

Sam"mi*er (?), n. A machine for pressing the water from skins in
tanning. Knight.

Sa*mo"an (?), a. Of or pertaining to the Samoan Islands (formerly
called Navigators' Islands) in the South Pacific Ocean, or their
inhabitants. -- n. An inhabitant of the Samoan Islands.

||Sa"mo*var (?), n. [Russ. samovar'.] A metal urn used in Russia for
||making tea. It is filled with water, which is heated by charcoal
||placed in a pipe, with chimney attached, which passes through the
||urn.

Sam`oy*edes" (?), n. pl.; sing. Samoyede (&?;). (Ethnol.) An ignorant
and degraded Turanian tribe which occupies a portion of Northern Russia
and a part of Siberia.

Samp (?), n. [From American Indian spac, saupac, made soft, or
thinned.] An article of food consisting of maize broken or bruised,
which is cooked by boiling, and usually eaten with milk; coarse hominy.

||Sam"pan (?), n. (Naut.) A Chinese boat from twelve to fifteen feet
||long, covered with a house, and sometimes used as a permanent
||habitation on the inland waters. [Written also sanpan.]

Sam"phire (? or ?; 277), n. [F. l'herbe de Saint Pierre. See Saint, and
Petrel.] (Bot.) (a) A fleshy, suffrutescent, umbelliferous European
plant (Crithmum maritimum). It grows among rocks and on cliffs along
the seacoast, and is used for pickles.

    Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!


Shak.

(b) The species of glasswort (Salicornia herbacea); -- called in
England marsh samphire. (c) A seashore shrub (Borrichia arborescens) of
the West Indies.

Golden samphire. See under Golden.

Sam"ple (?), n. [OE. sample, asaumple, OF. essample, example, fr. L.
exemplum. See Example, and cf. Ensample, Sampler.] 1. Example; pattern.
[Obs.] Spenser. "A sample to the youngest." Shak.

    Thus he concludes, and every hardy knight His sample followed.


Fairfax.

2. A part of anything presented for inspection, or shown as evidence of
the quality of the whole; a specimen; as, goods are often purchased by
samples.

    I design this but for a sample of what I hope more fully to
    discuss.


Woodward.

Syn. -- Specimen; example. See Specimen.

Sam"ple, v. t. 1. To make or show something similar to; to match. Bp.
Hall.

2. To take or to test a sample or samples of; as, to sample sugar,
teas, wools, cloths.

Sam"pler (?), n. [See Exampler, Exemplar.] 1. One who makes up samples
for inspection; one who examines samples, or by samples; as, a wool
sampler.

2. A pattern; a specimen; especially, a collection of needlework
patterns, as letters, borders, etc., to be used as samples, or to
display the skill of the worker.

    Susie dear, bring your sampler and Mrs. Schumann will show you how
    to make that W you bothered over.


E. E. Hale.

||Sam"shoo, Sam"shu (&?;), n. [Chinese san-shao thrice fired.] A
||spirituous liquor distilled by the Chinese from the yeasty liquor in
||which boiled rice has fermented under pressure. S. W. Williams.

Sam"son (?), n. An Israelite of Bible record (see Judges xiii.),
distinguished for his great strength; hence, a man of extraordinary
physical strength.

Samson post. (a) (Naut.) A strong post resting on the keelson, and
supporting a beam of the deck; also, a temporary or movable pillar
carrying a leading block or pulley for various purposes. Brande & C.
(b) In deep-well boring, the post which supports the walking beam of
the apparatus.

San`a*bil"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being sanable;
sanableness; curableness.

San"a*ble (?), a. [L. sanabilis, fr. sanare to heal, fr. sanus sound,
healthy. See Sane.] Capable of being healed or cured; susceptible of
remedy.

Syn. -- Remediable; curable; healable.

San"a*ble*ness, n. The quality of being sanable.

Sa*na"tion (?), n. [L. sanatio. See Sanable.] The act of healing or
curing. [Obs.] Wiseman.

San"a*tive (?), a. [LL. sanativus.] Having the power to cure or heal;
healing; tending to heal; sanatory. -- San"a*tive*ness, n.

San`a*to"ri*um (?), n. [NL. See Sanatory.] An establishment for the
treatment of the sick; a resort for invalids. See Sanitarium.

San"a*to*ry (?), a. [LL. sanatorius, fr. L. sanare to heal. See
Sanable.] Conducive to health; tending to cure; healing; curative;
sanative.

    Sanatory ordinances for the protection of public health, such as
    quarantine, fever hospitals, draining, etc.


De Quincey.

Sanatory and sanitary should not be confounded. Sanatory signifies
conducive to health, while sanitary has the more general meaning of
pertaining to health.

||San`be*ni"to (?), n. [Sp. & Pg. sambenito, contr. from L. saccus sack
||+ benedictus blessed.] 1. Anciently, a sackcloth coat worn by
||penitents on being reconciled to the church.

2. A garnment or cap, or sometimes both, painted with flames, figures,
etc., and worn by persons who had been examined by the Inquisition and
were brought forth for punishment at the auto-da-fé.

{ Sance"-bell` (?), Sanc"te bell` (?) }, n. See Sanctus bell, under
Sanctus.

Sanc"ti*fi*cate (?), v. t. [L. sanctificatus, p. p. of sanctificare.]
To sanctify. [Obs.] Barrow.

Sanc`ti*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [L. sanctificatio: cf. F. sanctification.]
1. The act of sanctifying or making holy; the state of being sanctified
or made holy; esp. (Theol.), the act of God's grace by which the
affections of men are purified, or alienated from sin and the world,
and exalted to a supreme love to God; also, the state of being thus
purified or sanctified.

    God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
    sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.


2 Thess. ii. 13.

2. The act of consecrating, or of setting apart for a sacred purpose;
consecration. Bp. Burnet.

Sanc"ti*fied (?), a. Made holy; also, made to have the air of sanctity;
sanctimonious.

Sanc"ti*fi`er (?), n. One who sanctifies, or makes holy; specifically,
the Holy Spirit.

Sanc"ti*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sanctified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sanctifying (?).] [F. sanctifier, L. sanctificare; sanctus holy +
-ficare (in comp.) to make. See Saint, and -fy.] 1. To make sacred or
holy; to set apart to a holy or religious use; to consecrate by
appropriate rites; to hallow.

    God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it.


Gen. ii. 3.

    Moses . . . sanctified Aaron and his garments.


Lev. viii. 30.

2. To make free from sin; to cleanse from moral corruption and
pollution; to purify.

    Sanctify them through thy truth.


John xvii. 17.

3. To make efficient as the means of holiness; to render productive of
holiness or piety.

    A means which his mercy hath sanctified so to me as to make me
    repent of that unjust act.


Eikon Basilike.

4. To impart or impute sacredness, venerableness, inviolability, title
to reverence and respect, or the like, to; to secure from violation; to
give sanction to.

    The holy man, amazed at what he saw, Made haste to sanctify the
    bliss by law.


Dryden.

    Truth guards the poet, sanctifies the line.


Pope.

Sanc"ti*fy`ing*ly (?), adv. In a manner or degree tending to sanctify
or make holy.

Sanc*til"o*quent (?), a. [L. sanctus holy + loquens, p. pr. of loqui to
speak.] Discoursing on heavenly or holy things, or in a holy manner.

Sanc`ti*mo"ni*al (?), a. [Cf. LL. sanctimonialis. ] Sanctimonious.
[Obs.]

Sanc`ti*mo"ni*ous (?), a. [See Sanctimony.] 1. Possessing sanctimony;
holy; sacred; saintly. Shak.

2. Making a show of sanctity; affecting saintliness; hypocritically
devout or pious. "Like the sanctimonious pirate." Shak.

-- Sanc`ti*mo"ni*ous*ly, adv. -- Sanc`ti*mo"ni*ous*ness, n.

Sanc"ti*mo*ny (?), n. [L. sanctimonia, fr. sanctus holy: cf. OF.
sanctimonie. See Saint.] Holiness; devoutness; scrupulous austerity;
sanctity; especially, outward or artificial saintliness; assumed or
pretended holiness; hypocritical devoutness.

    Her pretense is a pilgrimage; . . . which holy undertaking with
    most austere sanctimony she accomplished.


Shak.

Sanc"tion (?), n. [L. sanctio, from sancire, sanctum to render sacred
or inviolable, to fix unalterably: cf. F. sanction. See Saint.] 1.
Solemn or ceremonious ratification; an official act of a superior by
which he ratifies and gives validity to the act of some other person or
body; establishment or furtherance of anything by giving authority to
it; confirmation; approbation.

    The strictest professors of reason have added the sanction of their
    testimony.


I. Watts.

2. Anything done or said to enforce the will, law, or authority of
another; as, legal sanctions.

Syn. -- Ratification; authorization; authority; countenance; support.

Sanc"tion, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sanctioned (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sanctioning.] To give sanction to; to ratify; to confirm; to approve.

    Would have counseled, or even sanctioned, such perilous
    experiments.


De Quincey.

Syn. -- To ratify; confirm; authorize; countenance.

Sanc"tion*a*ry (?), a. Of, pertaining to, or giving, sanction.

Sanc"ti*tude (?), n. [L. sanctitudo.] Holiness; sacredness; sanctity.
[R.] Milton.

Sanc"ti*ty (?), n.; pl. Sanctities (#). [L. sanctitas, from sanctus
holy. See Saint.] 1. The state or quality of being sacred or holy;
holiness; saintliness; moral purity; godliness.

    To sanctity she made no pretense, and, indeed, narrowly escaped the
    imputation of irreligion.


Macaulay.

2. Sacredness; solemnity; inviolability; religious binding force; as,
the sanctity of an oath.

3. A saint or holy being. [R.]

    About him all the sanctities of heaven.


Milton.

Syn. -- Holiness; godliness; piety; devotion; goodness; purity;
religiousness; sacredness; solemnity. See the Note under Religion.

Sanc"tu*a*rize (?), v. t. To shelter by means of a sanctuary or sacred
privileges. [Obs.] Shak.

Sanc"tu*a*ry (?), n.; pl. Sanctuaries (#). [OE. seintuarie, OF.
saintuaire, F. sanctuaire, fr. L. sanctuarium, from sanctus sacred,
holy. See Saint.] A sacred place; a consecrated spot; a holy and
inviolable site. Hence, specifically: (a) The most retired part of the
temple at Jerusalem, called the Holy of Holies, in which was kept the
ark of the covenant, and into which no person was permitted to enter
except the high priest, and he only once a year, to intercede for the
people; also, the most sacred part of the tabernacle; also, the temple
at Jerusalem. (b) (Arch.) The most sacred part of any religious
building, esp. that part of a Christian church in which the altar is
placed. (c) A house consecrated to the worship of God; a place where
divine service is performed; a church, temple, or other place of
worship. (d) A sacred and inviolable asylum; a place of refuge and
protection; shelter; refuge; protection.

    These laws, whoever made them, bestowed on temples the privilege of
    sanctuary.


Milton.

    The admirable works of painting were made fuel for the fire; but
    some relics of it took sanctuary under ground, and escaped the
    common destiny.


Dryden.

Sanc"tum (?), n. [L., p. p. of sancire to consecrate.] A sacred place;
hence, a place of retreat; a room reserved for personal use; as, an
editor's sanctum.

||Sanctum sanctorum [L.], the Holy of Holies; the most holy place, as
||in the Jewish temple.

Sanc"tus (?), n. [L. sanctus, p. p. of sancire.] 1. (Eccl.) A part of
the Mass, or, in Protestant churches, a part of the communion service,
of which the first words in Latin are Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus [Holy,
holy, holy]; -- called also Tersanctus.

2. (Mus.) An anthem composed for these words.

Sanctus bell, a small bell usually suspended in a bell cot at the apex
of the nave roof, over the chancel arch, in mediæval churches, but a
hand bell is now often used; -- so called because rung at the singing
of the sanctus, at the conclusion of the ordinary of the Mass, and
again at the elevation of the host. Called also Mass bell, sacring
bell, saints' bell, sance-bell, sancte bell.

Sand (?), n. [AS. sand; akin to D. zand, G. sand, OHG. sant, Icel.
sandr, Dan. & Sw. sand, Gr. &?;.] 1. Fine particles of stone, esp. of
siliceous stone, but not reduced to dust; comminuted stone in the form
of loose grains, which are not coherent when wet.

    That finer matter, called sand, is no other than very small
    pebbles.


Woodward.

2. A single particle of such stone. [R.] Shak.

3. The sand in the hourglass; hence, a moment or interval of time; the
term or extent of one's life.

    The sands are numbered that make up my life.


Shak.

4. pl. Tracts of land consisting of sand, like the deserts of Arabia
and Africa; also, extensive tracts of sand exposed by the ebb of the
tide. "The Libyan sands." Milton. "The sands o' Dee." C. Kingsley.

5. Courage; pluck; grit. [Slang]

Sand badger (Zoöl.), the Japanese badger (Meles ankuma). -- Sand bag.
(a) A bag filled with sand or earth, used for various purposes, as in
fortification, for ballast, etc. (b) A long bag filled with sand, used
as a club by assassins. -- Sand ball, soap mixed with sand, made into a
ball for use at the toilet. -- Sand bath. (a) (Chem.) A vessel of hot
sand in a laboratory, in which vessels that are to be heated are
partially immersed. (b) A bath in which the body is immersed in hot
sand. -- Sand bed, a thick layer of sand, whether deposited naturally
or artificially; specifically, a thick layer of sand into which molten
metal is run in casting, or from a reducing furnace. -- Sand birds
(Zoöl.), a collective name for numerous species of limicoline birds,
such as the sandpipers, plovers, tattlers, and many others; -- called
also shore birds. -- Sand blast, a process of engraving and cutting
glass and other hard substances by driving sand against them by a steam
jet or otherwise; also, the apparatus used in the process. -- Sand box.
(a) A box with a perforated top or cover, for sprinkling paper with
sand. (b) A box carried on locomotives, from which sand runs on the
rails in front of the driving wheel, to prevent slipping. -- Sand-box
tree (Bot.), a tropical American tree (Hura crepitans). Its fruit is a
depressed many-celled woody capsule which, when completely dry, bursts
with a loud report and scatters the seeds. See Illust. of Regma. --
Sand bug (Zoöl.), an American anomuran crustacean (Hippa talpoidea)
which burrows in sandy seabeaches. It is often used as bait by
fishermen. See Illust. under Anomura. -- Sand canal (Zoöl.), a tubular
vessel having a calcareous coating, and connecting the oral ambulacral
ring with the madreporic tubercle. It appears to be excretory in
function. -- Sand cock (Zoöl.), the redshank. [Prov. Eng.] -- Sand
collar. (Zoöl.) Same as Sand saucer, below. -- Sand crab. (Zoöl.) (a)
The lady crab. (b) A land crab, or ocypodian. -- Sand crack (Far.), a
crack extending downward from the coronet, in the wall of a horse's
hoof, which often causes lameness. -- Sand cricket (Zoöl.), any one of
several species of large terrestrial crickets of the genus
Stenophelmatus and allied genera, native of the sandy plains of the
Western United States. -- Sand cusk (Zoöl.), any ophidioid fish. See
Illust. under Ophidioid. -- Sand dab (Zoöl.), a small American flounder
(Limanda ferruginea); -- called also rusty dab. The name is also
applied locally to other allied species. -- Sand darter (Zoöl.), a
small etheostomoid fish of the Ohio valley (Ammocrypta pellucida). --
Sand dollar (Zoöl.), any one of several species of small flat circular
sea urchins, which live on sandy bottoms, especially Echinarachnius
parma of the American coast. -- Sand drift, drifting sand; also, a
mound or bank of drifted sand. -- Sand eel. (Zoöl.) (a) A lant, or
launce. (b) A slender Pacific Ocean fish of the genus Gonorhynchus,
having barbels about the mouth. -- Sand flag, sandstone which splits up
into flagstones. -- Sand flea. (Zoöl.) (a) Any species of flea which
inhabits, or breeds in, sandy places, especially the common dog flea.
(b) The chigoe. (c) Any leaping amphipod crustacean; a beach flea, or
orchestian. See Beach flea, under Beach. -- Sand flood, a vast body of
sand borne along by the wind. James Bruce. -- Sand fluke. (Zoöl.) (a)
The sandnecker. (b) The European smooth dab (Pleuronectes
microcephalus); -- called also kitt, marysole, smear dab, town dab. --
Sand fly (Zoöl.), any one of several species of small dipterous flies
of the genus Simulium, abounding on sandy shores, especially Simulium
nocivum of the United States. They are very troublesome on account of
their biting habits. Called also no-see-um, punky, and midge. -- Sand
gall. (Geol.) See Sand pipe, below. -- Sand grass (Bot.), any species
of grass which grows in sand; especially, a tufted grass (Triplasis
purpurea) with numerous bearded joints, and acid awl-shaped leaves,
growing on the Atlantic coast. <! p. 1274 pr=PCP !> -- Sand grouse
(Zoöl.), any one of many species of Old World birds belonging to the
suborder Pterocletes, and resembling both grouse and pigeons. Called
also rock grouse, rock pigeon, and ganga. They mostly belong to the
genus Pterocles, as the common Indian species (P. exustus). The large
sand grouse (P. arenarius), the painted sand grouse (P. fasciatus), and
the pintail sand grouse (P. alchata) are also found in India. See
Illust. under Pterocletes. -- Sand hill, a hill of sand; a dune. --
Sand-hill crane (Zoöl.), the American brown crane (Grus Mexicana). --
Sand hopper (Zoöl.), a beach flea; an orchestian. -- Sand hornet
(Zoöl.), a sand wasp. -- Sand lark. (Zoöl.) (a) A small lark (Alaudala
raytal), native of India. (b) A small sandpiper, or plover, as the
ringneck, the sanderling, and the common European sandpiper. (c) The
Australian red- capped dotterel (Ægialophilus ruficapillus); -- called
also red-necked plover. -- Sand launce (Zoöl.), a lant, or launce. --
Sand lizard (Zoöl.), a common European lizard (Lacerta agilis). -- Sand
martin (Zoöl.), the bank swallow. -- Sand mole (Zoöl.), the coast rat.
-- Sand monitor (Zoöl.), a large Egyptian lizard (Monitor arenarius)
which inhabits dry localities. -- Sand mouse (Zoöl.), the dunlin.
[Prov. Eng.] -- Sand myrtle. (Bot.) See under Myrtle. -- Sand partridge
(Zoöl.), either of two small Asiatic partridges of the genus
Ammoperdix. The wings are long and the tarsus is spurless. One species
(A. Heeji) inhabits Palestine and Arabia. The other species (A.
Bonhami), inhabiting Central Asia, is called also seesee partridge, and
teehoo. -- Sand picture, a picture made by putting sand of different
colors on an adhesive surface. -- Sand pike. (Zoöl.) (a) The sauger.
(b) The lizard fish. -- Sand pillar, a sand storm which takes the form
of a whirling pillar in its progress in desert tracts like those of the
Sahara and Mongolia. -- Sand pipe (Geol.), a tubular cavity, from a few
inches to several feet in depth, occurring especially in calcareous
rocks, and often filled with gravel, sand, etc.; -- called also sand
gall. -- Sand pride (Zoöl.), a small British lamprey now considered to
be the young of larger species; -- called also sand prey. -- Sand pump,
in artesian well boring, a long, slender bucket with a valve at the
bottom for raising sand from the well. -- Sand rat (Zoöl.), the pocket
gopher. -- Sand rock, a rock made of cemented sand. -- Sand runner
(Zoöl.), the turnstone. -- Sand saucer (Zoöl.), the mass of egg
capsules, or oöthecæ, of any mollusk of the genus Natica and allied
genera. It has the shape of a bottomless saucer, and is coated with
fine sand; -- called also sand collar. -- Sand screw (Zoöl.), an
amphipod crustacean (Lepidactylis arenarius), which burrows in the
sandy seabeaches of Europe and America. -- Sand shark (Zoöl.), an
American shark (Odontaspis littoralis) found on the sandy coasts of the
Eastern United States; -- called also gray shark, and dogfish shark.
See Illust. under Remora. -- Sand skink (Zoöl.), any one of several
species of Old World lizards belonging to the genus Seps; as, the
ocellated sand skink (Seps ocellatus) of Southern Europe. -- Sand
skipper (Zoöl.), a beach flea, or orchestian. -- Sand smelt (Zoöl.), a
silverside. -- Sand snake. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of several species of
harmless burrowing snakes of the genus Eryx, native of Southern Europe,
Africa, and Asia, especially E. jaculus of India and E. Johnii, used by
snake charmers. (b) Any innocuous South African snake of the genus
Psammophis, especially P. sibilans. -- Sand snipe (Zoöl.), the
sandpiper. -- Sand star (Zoöl.), an ophiurioid starfish living on sandy
sea bottoms; a brittle star. -- Sand storm, a cloud of sand driven
violently by the wind. -- Sand sucker, the sandnecker. -- Sand swallow
(Zoöl.), the bank swallow. See under Bank. -- Sand tube, a tube made of
sand. Especially: (a) A tube of vitrified sand, produced by a stroke of
lightning; a fulgurite. (b) (Zoöl.) Any tube made of cemented sand. (c)
(Zoöl.) In starfishes, a tube having calcareous particles in its wall,
which connects the oral water tube with the madreporic plate. -- Sand
viper. (Zoöl.) See Hognose snake. -- Sand wasp (Zoöl.), any one of
numerous species of hymenopterous insects belonging to the families
Pompilidæ and Spheridæ, which dig burrows in sand. The female
provisions the nest with insects or spiders which she paralyzes by
stinging, and which serve as food for her young.

Sand (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sanded; p. pr. & vb. n. Sanding.] 1. To
sprinkle or cover with sand.

2. To drive upon the sand. [Obs.] Burton.

3. To bury (oysters) beneath drifting sand or mud.

4. To mix with sand for purposes of fraud; as, to sand sugar. [Colloq.]

San"dal (?), n. Same as Sendal.

    Sails of silk and ropes of sandal.


Longfellow.

San"dal, n. Sandalwood. "Fans of sandal." Tennyson.

San"dal, n. [F. sandale, L. sandalium, Gr. &?;, dim. of &?;, probably
from Per. sandal.] (a) A kind of shoe consisting of a sole strapped to
the foot; a protection for the foot, covering its lower surface, but
not its upper. (b) A kind of slipper. (c) An overshoe with parallel
openings across the instep.

San"daled (?), a. 1. Wearing sandals.

    The measured footfalls of his sandaled feet.


Longfellow.

2. Made like a sandal.

San*dal"i*form (?), a. [Sandal + -form.] (Bot.) Shaped like a sandal or
slipper.

San"dal*wood (?), n. [F. sandal, santal, fr. Ar. çandal, or Gr.
sa`ntalon; both ultimately fr. Skr. candana. Cf. Sanders.] (Bot.) (a)
The highly perfumed yellowish heartwood of an East Indian and
Polynesian tree (Santalum album), and of several other trees of the
same genus, as the Hawaiian Santalum Freycinetianum and S. pyrularium,
the Australian S. latifolium, etc. The name is extended to several
other kinds of fragrant wood. (b) Any tree of the genus Santalum, or a
tree which yields sandalwood. (c) The red wood of a kind of buckthorn,
used in Russia for dyeing leather (Rhamnus Dahuricus).

False sandalwood, the fragrant wood of several trees not of the genus
Santalum, as Ximenia Americana, Myoporum tenuifolium of Tahiti. -- Red
sandalwood, a heavy, dark red dyewood, being the heartwood of two
leguminous trees of India (Pterocarpus santalinus, and Adenanthera
pavonina); -- called also red sanderswood, sanders or saunders, and
rubywood.

{ San"da*rach, San"da*rac }, (&?;), n. [L. sandaraca, Gr. &?;.] 1.
(Min.) Realgar; red sulphide of arsenic. [Archaic]

2. (Bot. Chem.) A white or yellow resin obtained from a Barbary tree
(Callitris quadrivalvis or Thuya articulata), and pulverized for
pounce; -- probably so called from a resemblance to the mineral.

Sand"bag`ger (?), n. An assaulter whose weapon is a sand bag. See Sand
bag, under Sand.

Sand"-blind` (?), a. [For sam blind half blind; AS. sm- half (akin to
semi- ) + blind.] Having defective sight; dim-sighted; purblind. Shak.

Sand"ed, a. 1. Covered or sprinkled with sand; sandy; barren. Thomson.

2. Marked with small spots; variegated with spots; speckled; of a sandy
color, as a hound. Shak.

3. Short-sighted. [Prov. Eng.]

San`de*ma"ni*an (?), n. (Eccl. Hist.) A follower of Robert Sandeman, a
Scotch sectary of the eighteenth century. See Glassite.

San`de*ma"ni*an*ism (?), n. The faith or system of the Sandemanians. A.
Fuller.

San"der*ling (?), n. [Sand + - ling. So called because it obtains its
food by searching the moist sands of the seashore.] (Zoöl.) A small
gray and brown sandpiper (Calidris arenaria) very common on sandy
beaches in America, Europe, and Asia. Called also curwillet, sand lark,
stint, and ruddy plover.

San"ders (?), n. [See Sandal.] An old name of sandalwood, now applied
only to the red sandalwood. See under Sandalwood.

San"ders-blue" (?), n. See Saunders-blue.

San"de*ver (?), n. See Sandiver. [Obs.]

Sand"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A small marine fish of the Pacific coast of
North America (Trichodon trichodon) which buries itself in the sand.

Sand"glass` (?), n. An instrument for measuring time by the running of
sand. See Hourglass.

Sand"hill`er (?), n. A nickname given to any "poor white" living in the
pine woods which cover the sandy hills in Georgia and South Carolina.
[U.S.]

Sand"i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sandy, or of being of
a sandy color.

Sand"ish, a. Approaching the nature of sand; loose; not compact. [Obs.]
Evelyn.

San"di*ver (?), n. [Perh. fr. OF. saïn grease, fat + de of + verre
glass (cf. Saim), or fr. F. sel de verre sandiver.] A whitish substance
which is cast up, as a scum, from the materials of glass in fusion,
and, floating on the top, is skimmed off; -- called also glass gall.
[Formerly written also sandever.]

||San"dix (?), n. [L. sandix, sandyx, vermilion, or a color like
||vermilion, Gr. &?;, &?;.] A kind of minium, or red lead, made by
||calcining carbonate of lead, but inferior to true minium. [Written
||also sandyx.] [Obs.]

Sand"man` (?), n. A mythical person who makes children sleepy, so that
they rub their eyes as if there were sand in them.

Sand"neck`er (?), n. (Zoöl.) A European flounder (Hippoglossoides
limandoides); -- called also rough dab, long fluke, sand fluke, and
sand sucker.

Sand"pa`per (?), n. Paper covered on one side with sand glued fast, --
used for smoothing and polishing.

Sand"pa`per, v. t. To smooth or polish with sandpaper; as, to sandpaper
a door.

Sand"pi`per (?), n. 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of small
limicoline game birds belonging to Tringa, Actodromas, Ereunetes, and
various allied genera of the family Tringidæ.

The most important North American species are the pectoral sandpiper
(Tringa maculata), called also brownback, grass snipe, and jacksnipe;
the red-backed, or black- breasted, sandpiper, or dunlin (T. alpina);
the purple sandpiper (T. maritima: the red-breasted sandpiper, or knot
(T. canutus); the semipalmated sandpiper (Ereunetes pusillus); the
spotted sandpiper, or teeter-tail (Actitis macularia); the
buff-breasted sandpiper (Tryngites subruficollis), and the Bartramian
sandpiper, or upland plover. See under Upland. Among the European
species are the dunlin, the knot, the ruff, the sanderling, and the
common sandpiper (Actitis, or Tringoides, hypoleucus), called also
fiddler, peeper, pleeps, weet-weet, and summer snipe. Some of the small
plovers and tattlers are also called sandpipers.

2. (Zoöl.) A small lamprey eel; the pride.

Curlew sandpiper. See under Curlew. -- Stilt sandpiper. See under
Stilt.

Sand"pit` (?), n. A pit or excavation from which sand is or has been
taken.

San"dre (?), n. (Zoöl.) A Russian fish (Lucioperca sandre) which yields
a valuable oil, called sandre oil, used in the preparation of caviare.

Sand"stone` (?), n. A rock made of sand more or less firmly united.
Common or siliceous sandstone consists mainly of quartz sand.

Different names are applied to the various kinds of sandstone according
to their composition; as, granitic, argillaceous, micaceous, etc.

Flexible sandstone (Min.), the finer- grained variety of itacolumite,
which on account of the scales of mica in the lamination is quite
flexible. -- Red sandstone, a name given to two extensive series of
British rocks in which red sandstones predominate, one below, and the
other above, the coal measures. These were formerly known as the Old
and the New Red Sandstone respectively, and the former name is still
retained for the group preceding the Coal and referred to the Devonian
age, but the term New Red Sandstone is now little used, some of the
strata being regarded as Permian and the remained as Triassic. See the
Chart of Geology.

Sand"wich (?; 277), n. [Named from the Earl of Sandwich.] Two pieces of
bread and butter with a thin slice of meat, cheese, or the like,
between them.

Sand"wich, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sandwiched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sandwiching.] To make into a sandwich; also, figuratively, to insert
between portions of something dissimilar; to form of alternate parts or
things, or alternating layers of a different nature; to interlard.

Sand"worm` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of numerous species of annelids
which burrow in the sand of the seashore. (b) Any species of annelids
of the genus Sabellaria. They construct firm tubes of agglutinated sand
on rocks and shells, and are sometimes destructive to oysters. (c) The
chigoe, a species of flea.

Sand"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) Any plant of the genus Arenaria, low, tufted
herbs (order Caryophyllaceæ.)

Sand"y (?), a. [Compar. Sandier (?); superl. Sandiest.] [AS. sandig.]
1. Consisting of, abounding with, or resembling, sand; full of sand;
covered or sprinkled with sand; as, a sandy desert, road, or soil.

2. Of the color of sand; of a light yellowish red color; as, sandy
hair.

||San"dyx (?), n. [L.] See Sandix.

Sane (?), a. [L. sanus; cf. Gr. &?;, &?;, safe, sound. Cf. Sound, a.]
1. Being in a healthy condition; not deranged; acting rationally; --
said of the mind.

2. Mentally sound; possessing a rational mind; having the mental
faculties in such condition as to be able to anticipate and judge of
the effect of one's actions in an ordinary maner; -- said of persons.

Syn. -- Sound; healthy; underanged; unbroken.

Sane"ness, n. The state of being sane; sanity.

Sang (?), imp. of Sing.

{ ||San"ga (?), San"gu (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) The Abyssinian ox (Bos or
Bibos, Africanus), noted for the great length of its horns. It has a
hump on its back.

San`ga*ree" (?), n. [Sp. sangria, lit., bleeding, from sangre, blood,
L. sanguis.] Wine and water sweetened and spiced, -- a favorite West
Indian drink.

||Sang`-froid" (?), n. [F., cold blood.] Freedom from agitation or
||excitement of mind; coolness in trying circumstances; indifference;
||calmness. Burke.

San"gi*ac (?), n. See Sanjak.

{ San`graal" (?), San"gre*al (?) }, n. [See Saint, and Grail.] See Holy
Grail, under Grail.

San*guif"er*ous (?), a. [L. sanguis blood + -ferous.] (Physiol.)
Conveying blood; as, sanguiferous vessels, i. e., the arteries, veins,
capillaries.

San`gui*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. sanguification. See Sanguify.]
(Physiol.) The production of blood; the conversion of the products of
digestion into blood; hematosis.

San"gui*fi`er (?), n. A producer of blood.

San*guif"lu*ous (?), a. [L. sanguis blood + fluere to flow.] Flowing or
running with blood.

San"gui*fy (?), v. t. [L. sanguis blood + -fy: cf. F. sanguifier.] To
produce blood from.

San*guig"e*nous (?), a. [L. sanguis + -genous.] Producing blood; as,
sanguigenous food.

San`gui*na"ceous (?), n. Of a blood-red color; sanguine.

||San`gui*na"ri*a (?), n. [NL. See Sanguinary, a. & n.] 1. (Bot.) A
||genus of plants of the Poppy family.

Sanguinaria Canadensis, or bloodroot, is the only species. It has a
perennial rootstock, which sends up a few roundish lobed leaves and
solitary white blossoms in early spring. See Bloodroot.

2. The rootstock of the bloodroot, used in medicine as an emetic, etc.

San"gui*na*ri*ly (?), adv. In a sanguinary manner.

San"gui*na*ri*ness, n. The quality or state of being sanguinary.

San"gui*na*ry (?), a. [L. sanguinarius, fr. sanguis blood: cf. F.
sanguinaire.] 1. Attended with much bloodshed; bloody; murderous; as, a
sanguinary war, contest, or battle.

    We may not propagate religion by wars, or by sanguinary
    persecutions to force consciences.


Bacon.

2. Bloodthirsty; cruel; eager to shed blood.

    Passion . . . makes us brutal and sanguinary.


Broome.

Syn. -- Bloody; murderous; bloodthirsty; cruel.

San"gui*na*ry, n. [L. herba sanguinaria an herb that stanches blood:
cf. F. sanguinaire. See Sanguinary, a.] (Bot.) (a) The yarrow. (b) The
Sanguinaria.

San"guine (?), a. [F. sanguin, L. sanguineus, fr. sanguis blood. Cf.
Sanguineous.] 1. Having the color of blood; red.

    Of his complexion he was sanguine.


Chaucer.

    Like to that sanguine flower inscribed with woe.


Milton.

2. Characterized by abundance and active circulation of blood; as, a
sanguine bodily temperament.

3. Warm; ardent; as, a sanguine temper.

4. Anticipating the best; not desponding; confident; full of hope; as,
sanguine of success.

Syn. -- Warm; ardent; lively; confident; hopeful.

San"guine, n. 1. Blood color; red. Spenser.

2. Anything of a blood-red color, as cloth. [Obs.]

    In sanguine and in pes he clad was all.


Chaucer.

3. (Min.) Bloodstone.

4. Red crayon. See the Note under Crayon, 1.

San"guine, v. t. To stain with blood; to impart the color of blood to;
to ensanguine.

San"guine*less, a. Destitute of blood; pale. [R.]

San"guine*ly, adv. In a sanguine manner.

    I can not speculate quite so sanguinely as he does.


Burke.

San"guine*ness, n. The quality of being sanguine.

San*guin"e*ous (?), a. [L. sanguineus. See Sanguine.] 1. Abounding with
blood; sanguine.

2. Of or pertaining to blood; bloody; constituting blood. Sir T.
Browne.

3. Blood-red; crimson. Keats.

san*guin"i*ty, n. The quality of being sanguine; sanguineness. Swift.

San"gui*niv"o*rous (?), a. [L. sanguis + vorare to devour.] Subsisting
on blood.

San*guin"o*len*cy (?), n. The state of being sanguinolent, or bloody.

San*guin"o*lent (?), a. [L. sanguinolentus, from sanguis blood: cf. F.
sanguinolent.] Tinged or mingled with blood; bloody; as, sanguinolent
sputa.

San"gui*suge (?), n. [L. sanguisuga; sanguis blood + sugere to suck.]
(Zoöl.) A bloodsucker, or leech.

San*guiv"o*rous (?), a. [L. sanguis blood + vorare to devour.] (Zoöl.)
Subsisting upon blood; -- said of certain blood-sucking bats and other
animals. See Vampire.

{ San"he*drin (?), San"he*drim (?) }, n. [Heb. sanhedrn, fr. Gr. &?;;
&?; with + &?; a seat, fr. &?; to sit. See Sit.] (Jewish Antiq.) the
great council of the Jews, which consisted of seventy members, to whom
the high priest was added. It had jurisdiction of religious matters.

San"he*drist (?), n. A member of the sanhedrin. Schaeffer (Lange's
Com.).

||San"hi*ta (?), n. [Skr. samhita, properly, combination.] A collection
||of vedic hymns, songs, or verses, forming the first part of each
||Veda.

San"i*cle (?), n. [F., from L. sanare to heal.] (Bot.) Any plant of the
umbelliferous genus Sanicula, reputed to have healing powers.

San"i*dine (?), n. [Gr. &?;. &?;, a board. So called in allusion to the
tabular crystals.] (Min.) A variety of orthoclase feldspar common in
certain eruptive rocks, as trachyte; -- called also glassy feldspar.

||Sa"ni*es (?), n. [L.] (Med.) A thin, serous fluid commonly discharged
||from ulcers or foul wounds.

Sa"ni*ous (?), a. [L. saniosus, fr. sanies: cf. F. sanieux.] 1. (Med.)
Pertaining to sanies, or partaking of its nature and appearance; thin
and serous, with a slight bloody tinge; as, the sanious matter of an
ulcer.

2. (med.) Discharging sanies; as, a sanious ulcer.

San`i*ta"ri*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to health, or the laws of
health; sanitary.

San`i*ta"ri*an, n. An advocate of sanitary measures; one especially
interested or versed in sanitary measures.

San"i*ta*rist (?), n. A sanitarian.

San`i*ta"ri*um (?), n. [NL. See Sanitary.] A health station or retreat;
a sanatorium. "A sanitarium for troops." L. Oliphant.

San"i*ta*ry (?), a. [L. sanitas health: cf. F. sanitaire. See Sanity.]
Of or pertaining to health; designed to secure or preserve health;
relating to the preservation or restoration of health; hygienic; as,
sanitary regulations. See the Note under Sanatory.

Sanitary Commission. See under Commission.

San`i*ta"tion (?), n. The act of rendering sanitary; the science of
sanitary conditions; the preservation of health; the use of sanitary
measures; hygiene.

    How much sanitation has advanced during the last half century.


H. Hartshorne.

San"i*ty (?), n. [L. sanitas, from sanus sound, healthy. See Sane.] The
condition or quality of being sane; soundness of health of body or
mind, especially of the mind; saneness.

San"jak (?), n. [Turk. sanjg.] A district or a subvision of a vilayet.
[Turkey]

Sank (?), imp. of Sink.

||Sank"ha (?), n. [Skr. çankha a shell.] A chank shell (Turbinella
||pyrum); also, a shell bracelet or necklace made in India from the
||chank shell.

||Sankh"ya (?), n. A Hindoo system of philosophy which refers all
||things to soul and a rootless germ called prakriti, consisting of
||three elements, goodness, passion, and darkness. Whitworth.

San"nop (sn"np), n. Same as Sannup. Bancroft.

San"nup (-np), n. A male Indian; a brave; -- correlative of squaw.

San"ny (?), n. The sandpiper. [Prov. Eng.]

||Sans (sän; E. snz), prep. [F., from L. sine without.] Without;
||deprived or destitute of. Rarely used as an English word. "Sans
||fail." Chaucer.

    Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.


Shak.

San"scrit (?), n. See Sanskrit.

||Sans`-cu`lotte" (F. &?;; E. &?;), n. [F., without breeches.] 1. A
||fellow without breeches; a ragged fellow; -- a name of reproach given
||in the first French revolution to the extreme republican party, who
||rejected breeches as an emblem peculiar to the upper classes or
||aristocracy, and adopted pantaloons.

2. Hence, an extreme or radical republican; a violent revolutionist; a
Jacobin.

Sans`-cu*lot"tic (?), a. Pertaining to, or involving, sans-culottism;
radical; revolutionary; Jacobinical. Carlyle.

Sans`-cu*lot"tism (?), n. [F. sans- culottisme.] Extreme republican
principles; the principles or practice of the sans-culottes.

San"skrit (?), n. [Skr. Samskta the Sanskrit language, literally, the
perfect, polished, or classical language, fr. samskta prepared,
wrought, made, excellent, perfect; sam together (akin to E. same) + kta
made. See Same, Create.] [Written also Sanscrit.] The ancient language
of the Hindoos, long since obsolete in vernacular use, but preserved to
the present day as the literary and sacred dialect of India. It is
nearly allied to the Persian, and to the principal languages of Europe,
classical and modern, and by its more perfect preservation of the roots
and forms of the primitive language from which they are all descended,
is a most important assistance in determining their history and
relations. Cf. Prakrit, and Veda.

San"skrit, a. Of or pertaining to Sanskrit; written in Sanskrit; as, a
Sanskrit dictionary or inscription.

San*skrit"ic (?), a. Sanskrit.

San"skrit*ist, n. One versed in Sanskrit.

||Sans`-sou`ci" (?), adv. [F.] Without care; free and easy.

San"tal (?), n. [Santalum + piperonal.] (Chem.) A colorless crystalline
substance, isomeric with piperonal, but having weak acid properties. It
is extracted from sandalwood.

San`ta*la"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to a natural order of
plants (Santalaceæ), of which the genus Santalum is the type, and which
includes the buffalo nut and a few other North American plants, and
many peculiar plants of the southern hemisphere.

San*tal"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or obtained from,
sandalwood (Santalum); -- used specifically to designate an acid
obtained as a resinous or red crystalline dyestuff, which is called
also santalin.

San"ta*lin (?), n. [Cf. F. santaline.] (Chem.) Santalic acid. See
Santalic.

||San"ta*lum (?), n. [NL. See Sandalwood.] (Bot.) A genus of trees with
||entire opposite leaves and small apetalous flowers. There are less
||than a dozen species, occurring from India to Australia and the
||Pacific Islands. See Sandalwood.

San`tees" (?), n. pl.; sing. Santee (&?;). (Ethnol.) One of the seven
confederated tribes of Indians belonging to the Sioux, or Dakotas.

San"ter (?), v. i. See Saunter.

||San"ton (?), n. [Sp. santon, augmented fr. santo holy, L. sanctus.] A
||Turkish saint; a kind of dervish, regarded by the people as a saint:
||also, a hermit.

San"to*nate (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of santonic acid.

San*ton"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or designating, an acid
(distinct from santoninic acid) obtained from santonin as a white
crystalline substance.

San"to*nin (?), n. [L. herba santonica, a kind of plant, fr. Santoni a
people of Aquitania; cf. Gr. &?;: cf. F. santonine.] (Chem.) A white
crystalline substance having a bitter taste, extracted from the buds of
levant wormseed and used as an anthelmintic. It occassions a peculiar
temporary color blindness, causing objects to appear as if seen through
a yellow glass.

San"to*nin`ate (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of santoninic acid.

San`to*nin"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of or pertaining to santonin; -- used
specifically to designate an acid not known in the free state, but
obtained in its salts.

||Sa"o (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any marine annelid of the genus Hyalinæcia,
||especially H. tubicola of Europe, which inhabits a transparent
||movable tube resembling a quill in color and texture.

Sap (?), n. [AS. sæp; akin to OHG. saf, G. saft, Icel. safi; of
uncertain origin; possibly akin to L. sapere to taste, to be wise, sapa
must or new wine boiled thick. Cf. Sapid, Sapient.] 1. The juice of
plants of any kind, especially the ascending and descending juices or
circulating fluid essential to nutrition.

The ascending is the crude sap, the assimilation of which takes place
in the leaves, when it becomes the elaborated sap suited to the growth
of the plant.

2. The sapwood, or alburnum, of a tree.

3. A simpleton; a saphead; a milksop. [Slang]

Sap ball (Bot.), any large fungus of the genus Polyporus. See
Polyporus. -- Sap green, a dull light green pigment prepared from the
juice of the ripe berries of the Rhamnus catharticus, or buckthorn. It
is used especially by water-color artists. -- Sap rot, the dry rot. See
under Dry. -- Sap sucker (Zoöl.), any one of several species of small
American woodpeckers of the genus Sphyrapicus, especially the
yellow-bellied woodpecker (S. varius) of the Eastern United States.
They are so named because they puncture the bark of trees and feed upon
the sap. The name is loosely applied to other woodpeckers. -- Sap tube
(Bot.), a vessel that conveys sap.

Sap, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sapped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sapping.] [F.
saper (cf. Sp. zapar, It. zapare), fr. sape a sort of scythe, LL. sappa
a sort of mattock.] 1. To subvert by digging or wearing away; to mine;
to undermine; to destroy the foundation of.

    Nor safe their dwellings were, for sapped by floods, Their houses
    fell upon their household gods.


Dryden.

2. (Mil.) To pierce with saps.

3. To make unstable or infirm; to unsettle; to weaken.

    Ring out the grief that saps the mind.


Tennyson.

Sap (?), v. i. To proceed by mining, or by secretly undermining; to
execute saps. W. P. Craighill.

    Both assaults are carried on by sapping.


Tatler.

Sap, n. (Mil.) A narrow ditch or trench made from the foremost parallel
toward the glacis or covert way of a besieged place by digging under
cover of gabions, etc.

Sap fagot (Mil.), a fascine about three feet long, used in sapping, to
close the crevices between the gabions before the parapet is made. --
Sap roller (Mil.), a large gabion, six or seven feet long, filled with
fascines, which the sapper sometimes rolls along before him for
protection from the fire of an enemy.

Sap`a*dil"lo (?), n. See Sapodila.

Sap"a*jo (?), n. (Zoöl.) The sapajou.

Sap"a*jou (?), n. [F. sapajou, sajou, Braz. sajuassu.] (Zoöl.) Any one
of several species of South American monkeys of the genus Cebus, having
long and prehensile tails. Some of the species are called also
capuchins. The bonnet sapajou (C. subcristatus), the golden-handed
sapajou (C. chrysopus), and the white-throated sapajou (C. hypoleucus)
are well known species. See Capuchin.

Sa*pan" wood (?). [Malay sapang.] (Bot.) A dyewood yielded by
Cæsalpinia Sappan, a thorny leguminous tree of Southern Asia and the
neighboring islands. It is the original Brazil wood. [Written also
sappan wood.]

Sap"ful (?), a. Abounding in sap; sappy.

Sap"head` (?), n. A weak-minded, stupid fellow; a milksop. [Low]

Sa*phe"nous (?), a. [Gr. &?; manifest.] (Anat.) (a) Manifest; --
applied to the two principal superficial veins of the lower limb of
man. (b) Of, pertaining to, or in the region of, the saphenous veins;
as, the saphenous nerves; the saphenous opening, an opening in the
broad fascia of the thigh through which the internal saphenous vein
passes.

Sap"id (?), a. [L. sapidus, fr. sapere to taste: cf. F. sapide. See
Sapient, Savor.] Having the power of affecting the organs of taste;
possessing savor, or flavor.

    Camels, to make the water sapid, do raise the mud with their feet.


Sir T. Browne.

Sa*pid"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. sapidité.] The quality or state of being
sapid; taste; savor; savoriness.

    Whether one kind of sapidity is more effective than another.


M. S. Lamson.

Sap"id*ness, n. Quality of being sapid; sapidity.

    When the Israelites fancied the sapidness and relish of the
    fleshpots, they longed to taste and to return.


Jer. Taylor.

Sa"pi*ence (?), n. [L. sapientia: cf. F. sapience. See Sapient..] The
quality of being sapient; wisdom; sageness; knowledge. Cowper.

    Woman, if I might sit beside your feet, And glean your scattered
    sapience.


Tennyson.

Sa"pi*ent (?), a. [L. sapiens, -entis, p. pr. of sapere to taste, to
have sense, to know. See Sage, a.] Wise; sage; discerning; -- often in
irony or contempt.

    Where the sapient king Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian
    spouse.


Milton.

Syn. -- Sage; sagacious; knowing; wise; discerning.

Sa`pi*en"tial (?), a. [L. sapientialis.] Having or affording wisdom. --
Sa`pi*en"tial*ly, adv.

    The sapiential books of the Old [Testament].


Jer. Taylor.

Sa`pi*en"tious (?), a. Sapiential. [Obs.]

Sa"pi*ent*ize, v. t. To make sapient. [R.] Coleridge.

Sa"pi*ent*ly (?), adv. In a sapient manner.

Sap`in*da"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to an order of trees
and shrubs (Sapindaceæ), including the (typical) genus Sapindus, the
maples, the margosa, and about seventy other genera.

||Sa*pin"dus (?), n. [NL., fr. L. sapo soap + Indicus Indian.] (Bot.) A
||genus of tropical and subtropical trees with pinnate leaves and
||panicled flowers. The fruits of some species are used instead of
||soap, and their round black seeds are made into necklaces.

Sap"less (?), a. 1. Destitute of sap; not juicy.

2. Fig.: Dry; old; husky; withered; spiritless. "A somewhat sapless
womanhood." Lowell.

    Now sapless on the verge of death he stands.


Dryden.

sap"ling (?), n. A young tree. Shak.

Sap`o*dil"la (?), n. [Sp. zapote, sapotillo, zapotillo, Mexican
cochit-zapotl. Cf. Sapota.] (Bot.) A tall, evergeen, tropical American
tree (Achras Sapota); also, its edible fruit, the sapodilla plum.
[Written also sapadillo, sappadillo, sappodilla, and zapotilla.]

Sapodilla plum (Bot.), the fruit of Achras Sapota. It is about the size
of an ordinary quince, having a rough, brittle, dull brown rind, the
flesh being of a dirty yellowish white color, very soft, and
deliciously sweet. Called also naseberry. It is eatable only when it
begins to be spotted, and is much used in desserts.

Sa*pog"e*nin (?), n. [Saponin + -gen + -in.] (Chem.) A white
crystalline substance obtained by the decomposition of saponin.

Sap`o*na"ceous (?), a. [L. sapo, -onis, soap, of Teutonic origin, and
akin to E. soap. See Soap.] Resembling soap; having the qualities of
soap; soapy.

Saponaceous bodies are compounds of an acid and a base, and are in
reality a kind of salt.

Sap`o*nac"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being saponaceous.

Sap"o*na*ry (?), a. Saponaceous. Boyle.

Sa*pon*i*fi`a*ble (?), a. Capable of conversion into soap; as, a
saponifiable substance.

Sa*pon`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. saponification. See Saponify.] The
act, process, or result, of soap making; conversion into soap;
specifically (Chem.), the decomposition of fats and other ethereal
salts by alkalies; as, the saponification of ethyl acetate.

Sa*pon"i*fi`er (?), n. (Chem.) That which saponifies; any reagent used
to cause saponification.

Sa*pon"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saponified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Saponifying (?).] [L. sapo, -onis, soap + -fy: cf. F. saponifier.] To
convert into soap, as tallow or any fat; hence (Chem.), to subject to
any similar process, as that which ethereal salts undergo in
decomposition; as, to saponify ethyl acetate.

Sap"o*nin (?), n. [L. sapo, - onis soap: cf. F. saponine.] (Chem.) A
poisonous glucoside found in many plants, as in the root of soapwort
(Saponaria), in the bark of soap bark (Quillaia), etc. It is extracted
as a white amorphous powder, which occasions a soapy lather in
solution, and produces a local anæsthesia. Formerly called also
struthiin, quillaiin, senegin, polygalic acid, etc. By extension, any
one of a group of related bodies of which saponin proper is the type.

Sap"o*nite (?), n. [Sw. saponit, fr. L. sapo, -onis, soap.] (Min.) A
hydrous silicate of magnesia and alumina. It occurs in soft, soapy,
amorphous masses, filling veins in serpentine and cavities in trap
rock.

Sap"o*nul (?), n. [F. saponule, fr. L. sapo, -onis, soap.] (Old Chem.)
A soapy mixture obtained by treating an essential oil with an alkali;
hence, any similar compound of an essential oil. [Written also
saponule.] [Obs.]

||Sa"por (?), n. [L. See Savor.] Power of affecting the organs of
||taste; savor; flavor; taste.

    There is some sapor in all aliments.


Sir T. Browne.

Sap`o*rif"ic (?), a. [L. sapor taste + facere to make.] Having the
power to produce the sensation of taste; producing taste, flavor, or
relish.

Sap`o*ros"i*ty (?), n. The quality of a body by which it excites the
sensation of taste.

Sap"o*rous (?), a. [L. saporus that relishes well, savory, fr. sapor
taste.] Having flavor or taste; yielding a taste. [R.] Bailey.

Sa*po"ta (?), n. [NL., from Sp. sapote, zapote. See Sapodilla.] (Bot.)
The sapodilla.

Sap`o*ta"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to a natural order
(Sapotaceæ) of (mostly tropical) trees and shrubs, including the star
apple, the Lucuma, or natural marmalade tree, the gutta-percha tree
(Isonandra), and the India mahwa, as well as the sapodilla, or sapota,
after which the order is named.

Sap*pan" wood" (?). Sapan wood.

Sap"pare (?), n. [F. sappare; -- so called by Saussure.] (Min.)
Kyanite. [Written also sappar.]

Sap"per (?), n. [Cf. F. sapeur.] One who saps; specifically (Mil.), one
who is employed in working at saps, building and repairing
fortifications, and the like.

Sap"phic (?), a. [L. Sapphicus, Gr. &?;, fr. &?; Sappho.] 1. Of or
pertaining to Sappho, the Grecian poetess; as, Sapphic odes; Sapphic
verse.

2. (Pros.) Belonging to, or in the manner of, Sappho; -- said of a
certain kind of verse reputed to have been invented by Sappho,
consisting of five feet, of which the first, fourth, and fifth are
trochees, the second is a spondee, and the third a dactyl.

Sap"phic, n. (Pros.) A Sapphic verse.

Sap"phire (? or ?; 277), n. [OE. saphir, F. saphir, L. sapphirus, Gr.
&?;, of Oriental origin; cf. Heb. sappr.] 1. (Min.) Native alumina or
aluminium sesquioxide, Al2O3; corundum; esp., the blue transparent
variety of corundum, highly prized as a gem.

    Of rubies, sapphires, and of pearlés white.


Chaucer.

Sapphire occurs in hexagonal crystals and also in granular and massive
forms. The name sapphire is usually restricted to the blue crystals,
while the bright red crystals are called Oriental rubies (see under
Ruby), the amethystine variety Oriental amethyst (see under Amethyst),
and the dull massive varieties corundum (a name which is also used as a
general term to include all varieties). See Corundum.

2. The color of the gem; bright blue.

3. (Zoöl.) Any humming bird of the genus Hylocharis, native of South
America. The throat and breast are usually bright blue.

Star sapphire, or Asteriated sapphire (Min.), a kind of sapphire which
exhibits asterism.

Sap"phire, a. Of or resembling sapphire; sapphirine; blue. "The
sapphire blaze." Gray.

Sap"phir*ine (?), n. Resembling sapphire; made of sapphire; having the
color, or any quality of sapphire. "Sapphirine degree of hardness."
Boyle.

Sap"pho (?), n. [See Sapphic.] (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of
brilliant South American humming birds of the genus Sappho, having very
bright- colored and deeply forked tails; -- called also firetail.

Sap"pi*ness (?), n. The quality of being sappy; juiciness.

Sap`po*dil"la (?), n. (Bot.) See Sapodilla.

Sap"py (?), a. [Compar. Sappier (?); superl. Sappiest.] [From 1st Sap.]

1. Abounding with sap; full of sap; juicy; succulent.

2. Hence, young, not firm; weak, feeble.

    When he had passed this weak and sappy age.


Hayward.

3. Weak in intellect. [Low]

4. (Bot.) Abounding in sap; resembling, or consisting largely of,
sapwood.

Sap"py (?), a. [Written also sapy.] [Cf. L. sapere to taste.] Musty;
tainted. [Obs.]

Sa*proph"a*gan (?), n. [Gr. sapro`s rotten + fagei^n to eat: cf. F.
saprophage.] (Zoöl.) One of a tribe of beetles which feed upon decaying
animal and vegetable substances; a carrion beetle.

Sa*proph"a*gous (?), a. (Zoöl.) Feeding on carrion.

Sap"ro*phyte (?), n. [Gr. sapro`s rotten + fyto`n a plant.] (Bot.) Any
plant growing on decayed animal or vegetable matter, as most fungi and
some flowering plants with no green color, as the Indian pipe.

Sap`ro*phyt"ic (?), a. Feeding or growing upon decaying animal or
vegetable matter; pertaining to a saprophyte or the saprophytes.

Sap"sa*go (?), n. [G. schabzieger; schaben to shave, to scrape + zieger
a sort of whey.] A kind of Swiss cheese, of a greenish color, flavored
with melilot.

Sap"skull` (?), n. A saphead. [Low]

Sap`u*ca"ia (?; Pg. &?;), n. [Pg. sapucaya.] (Bot.) A Brazilian tree.
See Lecythis, and Monkey-pot. [Written also sapucaya.]

Sapucaia nut (Bot.), the seed of the sapucaia; -- called also paradise
nut.

Sap"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) The alburnum, or part of the wood of any
exogenous tree next to the bark, being that portion of the tree through
which the sap flows most freely; -- distinguished from heartwood.

Sar"a*ba*ite (?), n. [LL. Sarabaïtae, pl.] (Eccl. Hist.) One of certain
vagrant or heretical Oriental monks in the early church.

Sar"a*band (?), n. [F. sarabande, Sp. zarabanda, fr. Per. serbend a
song.] A slow Spanish dance of Saracenic origin, to an air in triple
time; also, the air itself.

    She has brought us the newest saraband from the court of Queen Mab.


Sir W. Scott.

Sar"a*cen (?), n. [L. Saracenus perhaps fr. Ar. sharqi, pl. sharqin,
Oriental, Eastern, fr. sharaqa to rise, said of the sun: cf. F.
sarrasin. Cf. Sarcenet, Sarrasin, Sirocco.] Anciently, an Arab; later,
a Mussulman; in the Middle Ages, the common term among Christians in
Europe for a Mohammedan hostile to the crusaders.

Saracens' consound (Bot.), a kind of ragwort (Senecio Saracenicus),
anciently used to heal wounds.

{ Sar`a*cen"ic (?), Sar`a*cen"ic*al (?) }, a. Of or pertaining to the
Saracens; as, Saracenic architecture. "Saracenic music." Sir W. Scott.

Sar"a*sin (?), n. (Arch.) See Sarrasin.

||Sa`ras*wa"ti (?), n. [Skr. Sarasvat.] (Hind. Myth.) The sakti or wife
||of Brahma; the Hindoo goddess of learning, music, and poetry.

Sar"casm (?), n. [F. sarcasme, L. sarcasmus, Gr. sarkasmo`s, from
sarka`zein to tear flesh like dogs, to bite the lips in rage, to speak
bitterly, to sneer, fr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh.] A keen, reproachful
expression; a satirical remark uttered with some degree of scorn or
contempt; a taunt; a gibe; a cutting jest.

    The sarcasms of those critics who imagine our art to be a matter of
    inspiration.


Sir J. Reynolds.

Syn. -- Satire; irony; ridicule; taunt; gibe.

Sar*cas"mous (?), a. Sarcastic. [Obs.] "Sarcasmous scandal." Hubidras.

{ Sar*cas"tic (?), Sar*cas"tic*al (?) }, a. Expressing, or expressed
by, sarcasm; characterized by, or of the nature of, sarcasm; given to
the use of sarcasm; bitterly satirical; scornfully severe; taunting.

    What a fierce and sarcastic reprehension would this have drawn from
    the friendship of the world!


South.

Sar*cas"tic*al*ly, adv. In a sarcastic manner.

Sar"cel (?), n. [OF. cercel, F. cerceau, L. circellus, dim. of
circulus. See Circle.] One of the outer pinions or feathers of the wing
of a bird, esp. of a hawk.

Sar"celed (?), a. (her.) Cut through the middle.

||Sar`celle" (?), n. [F., fr. L. querquedula.] (Zoöl.) The old squaw,
||or long- tailed duck.

Sarce"net (?), n. [OF. sarcenet; cf. LL. saracenicum cloth made by
Saracens. See Saracen.] A species of fine thin silk fabric, used for
linings, etc. [Written also sarsenet.]

    Thou green sarcenet flap for a sore eye.


Shak.

Sar"cin (?), n. Same as Hypoxanthin.

||Sar*ci"na (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; of flesh, fr. sa`rx, sa`rkos,
||flesh.] (Biol.) A genus of bacteria found in various organic fluids,
||especially in those those of the stomach, associated with certain
||diseases. The individual organisms undergo division along two
||perpendicular partitions, so that multiplication takes place in two
||directions, giving groups of four cubical cells. Also used
||adjectively; as, a sarcina micrococcus; a sarcina group.

Sarcina form (Biol.), the tetrad form seen in the division of a
dumb-bell group of micrococci into four; -- applied particularly to
bacteria. See micrococcus.

Sar"cle (?), v. t. [F. sarcler to weed, fr. L. sarculare to hoe, fr.
sarculum hoe.] To weed, or clear of weeds, with a hoe. [Obs.]
Ainsworth.

Sar"co- (?). A combining form from Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh; as,
sarcophagous, flesh-eating; sarcology.

||Sar*cob"a*sis (?), n.; pl. Sarcobases (#). [NL., fr. Gr. sa`rx,
||sa`rkos, flesh + &?; base.] (Bot.) A fruit consisting of many dry
||indehiscent cells, which contain but few seeds and cohere about a
||common style, as in the mallows.

Sar"co*blast (?), n. [Sarco- + -blast.] (Zoöl.) A minute yellowish body
present in the interior of certain rhizopods.

Sar"co*carp (?), n. [Sarco- + Gr. &?; fruit: cf. F. sarcocarpe.] (Bot.)
The fleshy part of a stone fruit, situated between the skin, or
epicarp, and the stone, or endocarp, as in a peach. See Illust. of
Endocarp.

The term has also been used to denote any fruit which is fleshy
throughout. M. T. Masters.

Sar"co*cele (?), n. [Gr. &?;; sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh + &?; tumor: cf. F.
sarcocèle.] (Med.) Any solid tumor of the testicle.

{ Sar"co*col (?), Sar`co*col"la (?) }, n. [L. sarcocolla, from Gr. &?;;
sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh + &?; glue: cf. F. sarcocolle.] A gum resin
obtained from certain shrubs of Africa (Penæa), -- formerly thought to
cause healing of wounds and ulcers.

Sar"code (?), n. [Gr. &?; fleshy; sa`rx, flesh + e'i^dos form. Cf.
Sarcoid.] (Biol.) A name applied by Dujardin in 1835 to the gelatinous
material forming the bodies of the lowest animals; protoplasm.

{ Sar"co*derm (?), ||sar`co*der"ma (?) }, n. [NL. sarcoderma. See
Sarco-, and Derm.] (Bot.) (a) A fleshy covering of a seed, lying
between the external and internal integuments. (b) A sarcocarp.

Sar*cod"ic (? or ?), a. (Biol.) Of or pertaining to sarcode.

Sar"coid (?), a. [Gr. &?;. See Sarcode.] (Biol.) Resembling flesh, or
muscle; composed of sarcode.

Sar`co*lac"tic (?), a. [Sarco- + lactic.] (Physiol. Chem.) Relating to
muscle and milk; as, sarcolactic acid. See Lactic acid, under Lactic.

Sar`co*lem"ma (?), n. [NL., from Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh + &?; rind,
skin.] (Anat.) The very thin transparent and apparently homogeneous
sheath which incloses a striated muscular fiber; the myolemma.

Sar"co*line (?), a. [Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh.] (Min.) Flesh-colored.

{ Sar`co*log"ic (?), Sar`co*log"ic*al (?) }, a. Of or pertaining to
sarcology.

Sar*col"o*gy (?), n. [Sarco- + -logy: cf. F. sarcologie.] That part of
anatomy which treats of the soft parts. It includes myology, angiology,
neurology, and splanchnology.

||Sar*co"ma (?), n.; pl. L. Sarcomata (# or #), E. sarcomas (#). [NL.,
||from Gr. &?;, from sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh.] (Med.) A tumor of fleshy
||consistence; -- formerly applied to many varieties of tumor, now
||restricted to a variety of malignant growth made up of cells
||resembling those of fetal development without any proper
||intercellular substance.

Sar*com"a*tous (? or ?), a. (Med.) Of or pertaining to sarcoma;
resembling sarcoma.

||Sar*coph"a*ga (?), n. pl. [NL., neut. pl. See Sarcophagus.] (Zoöl.) A
||suborder of carnivorous and insectivorous marsupials including the
||dasyures and the opossums.

||Sar*coph"a*ga, n. [NL., fem. sing. See Sarcophagus.] (Zoöl.) A genus
||of Diptera, including the flesh flies.

Sar*coph"a*gan (?), n. 1. (Zoöl.) Any animal which eats flesh,
especially any carnivorous marsupial.

2. (Zoöl.) Any fly of the genus Sarcophaga.

Sar*coph"a*gous (?), a. (Zoöl.) Feeding on flesh; flesh-eating;
carnivorous.

Sar*coph"a*gus (?), n.; pl. L. Sarcophagi (#), E. Sarcophaguses (#).
[L., fr. Gr. sarkofa`gos, properly, eating flesh; sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh
+ fagei^n to eat. Cf. Sarcasm.] 1. A species of limestone used among
the Greeks for making coffins, which was so called because it consumed
within a few weeks the flesh of bodies deposited in it. It is otherwise
called lapis Assius, or Assian stone, and is said to have been found at
Assos, a city of Lycia. Holland.

2. A coffin or chest-shaped tomb of the kind of stone described above;
hence, any stone coffin.

3. A stone shaped like a sarcophagus and placed by a grave as a
memorial.

Sar*coph"a*gy (?), n. [Gr. sarkofagi`a. See Sarcophagus.] The practice
of eating flesh.

Sar"co*phile (?), n. [Sacro- + Gr. &?; a lover.] (Zoöl.) A flesh-eating
animal, especially any one of the carnivorous marsupials.

||Sar*cop"tes (?), n. [NL., from Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh + ko`ptein
||to cut.] (Zoöl.) A genus of parasitic mites including the itch mites.

Sar*cop"tid (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of the genus Sarcoptes and
related genera of mites, comprising the itch mites and mange mites. --
a. Of or pertaining to the itch mites.

||Sar`co*rham"phi (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh + &?;
||beak.] (Zoöl.) A division of raptorial birds comprising the vultures.

||Sar`co*sep"tum (?), n.; pl. Sarcosepta (#). [Sarco- + septum.]
||(Zoöl.) One of the mesenteries of an anthozoan.

Sar"co*sin (?), n. (Physiol. Chem.) A crystalline nitrogenous
substance, formed in the decomposition of creatin (one of the
constituents of muscle tissue). Chemically, it is methyl glycocoll.

||Sar*co"sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;, fr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh.]
||(Med.) (a) Abnormal formation of flesh. (b) Sarcoma.

Sar*cot"ic (?), a. [Gr. &?;: cf. F. sarcotique.] (Med.) Producing or
promoting the growth of flesh. [R.] -- n. A sarcotic medicine. [R.]

Sar"cous (?), a. [Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh.] (Anat.) Fleshy; --
applied to the minute structural elements, called sarcous elements, or
sarcous disks, of which striated muscular fiber is composed.

Sar`cu*la"tion (?), n. [L. sarculatio. See Sarcle.] A weeding, as with
a hoe or a rake.

Sard (?), n. [L. sarda, Gr. &?;, or &?; (sc. &?;), i.e., Sardian stone,
fr. &?; Sardian, &?; Sardes, the capital of Lydia: cf. F. sarde. Cf.
Sardius.] (Min.) A variety of carnelian, of a rich reddish yellow or
brownish red color. See the Note under Chalcedony.

Sar"da*chate (?), n. [L. sardachates: cf. F. sardachate. See Sard, and
Agate.] (Min.) A variety of agate containing sard.

{ Sar"dan (?), Sar"del (?) }, n. [It. sardella. See Sardine a fish.]
(Zoöl.) A sardine. [Obs.]

Sar"del, n. A precious stone. See Sardius.

Sar"dine (? or ?; 277), n. [F. sardine (cf. Sp. sardina, sarda, It.
sardina, sardella), L. sardina, sarda; cf. Gr. &?;, &?;; so called from
the island of Sardinia, Gr. &?;.] (Zoöl.) Any one of several small
species of herring which are commonly preserved in olive oil for food,
especially the pilchard, or European sardine (Clupea pilchardus). The
California sardine (Clupea sagax) is similar. The American sardines of
the Atlantic coast are mostly the young of the common herring and of
the menhaden.

Sar"dine (? or ?; 277), n. See Sardius.

Sar*din"i*an (?), a. [L. Sardinianus.] Of or pertaining to the island,
kingdom, or people of Sardinia. -- n. A native or inhabitant of
Sardinia.

Sar"di*us (?), n. [L. sardius, lapis sardinus, Gr. &?;, &?;, &?;. See
Sard.] A precious stone, probably a carnelian, one of which was set in
Aaron's breastplate. Ex. xxviii. 17.

Sar"doin (?), n. [Cf. F. sardoine.] (Min.) Sard; carnelian.

Sar*do"ni*an (?), a. [Cf. F. sardonien.] Sardonic. [Obs.] "With
Sardonian smile." Spenser.

Sar*don"ic (?), a. [F. sardonique, L. sardonius, Gr. &?;, &?;, perhaps
fr. &?; to grin like a dog, or from a certain plant of Sardinia, Gr.
&?;, which was said to screw up the face of the eater.] Forced;
unnatural; insincere; hence, derisive, mocking, malignant, or bitterly
sarcastic; -- applied only to a laugh, smile, or some facial semblance
of gayety.

    Where strained, sardonic smiles are glozing still, And grief is
    forced to laugh against her will.


Sir H. Wotton.

    The scornful, ferocious, sardonic grin of a bloody ruffian.


Burke.

Sardonic grin or laugh, an old medical term for a spasmodic affection
of the muscles of the face, giving it an appearance of laughter.

Sar*don"ic, a. Of, pertaining to, or resembling, a kind of linen made
at Colchis.

Sar"do*nyx (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;. See Sard, and Onyx.] (Min.) A
variety of onyx consisting of sard and white chalcedony in alternate
layers.

||Sa"ree (?), n. [Hind. &?;.] The principal garment of a Hindoo woman.
||It consists of a long piece of cloth, which is wrapped round the
||middle of the body, a portion being arranged to hang down in front,
||and the remainder passed across the bosom over the left shoulder.

Sar*gas"so (?), n. [Sp. sargazo seaweed.] (Bot.) The gulf weed. See
under Gulf.

Sargasso Sea, a large tract of the North Atlantic Ocean where sargasso
in great abundance floats on the surface.

||Sar*gas"sum (?), n. [NL.] A genus of algæ including the gulf weed.

||Sar"go (?), n. [Sp. sargo, L. sargus a kind of fish.] (Zoöl.) Any one
||of several species of sparoid fishes belonging to Sargus, Pomadasys,
||and related genera; -- called also sar, and saragu.

||Sa"ri (?), n. Same as Saree.

||Sa*rigue" (?), n. [F., from Braz. çarigueia, çarigueira.] (Zoöl.) A
||small South American opossum (Didelphys opossum), having four white
||spots on the face.

Sark (?), n. [AS. serce, syrce, a shirt; akin to Icel. serkr, Sw.
särk.] A shirt. [Scot.]

Sark, v. t. (Carp.) To cover with sarking, or thin boards.

Sar"kin (?), n. [Gr. sa`rx, sa`rkos, flesh.] (Physiol. Chem.) Same as
Hypoxanthin.

Sark"ing (?), n. [From Sark shirt.] (Carp.) Thin boards for sheathing,
as above the rafters, and under the shingles or slates, and for similar
purposes.

{ Sar"lac (?), Sar"lyk (?) }, n. [Mongolian sarlyk.] (Zoöl.) The yak.

{ Sar*ma"tian (?), Sar*mat"ic (?) }, a. [L. Sarmaticus.] Of or
pertaining to Sarmatia, or its inhabitants, the ancestors of the
Russians and the Poles.

Sar"ment (?), n. [L. sarmentum a twig, fr. sarpere to cut off, to trim:
cf. F. sarment.] (Bot.) A prostrate filiform stem or runner, as of the
strawberry. See Runner.

Sar`men*ta"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Bearing sarments, or runners, as the
strawberry.

Sar`men*tose" (? or ?), a. [L. sarmentosus: cf. F. sarmenteux. See
Sarment.] (Bot.) (a) Long and filiform, and almost naked, or having
only leaves at the joints where it strikes root; as, a sarmentose stem.
(b) Bearing sarments; sarmentaceous.

Sar*men"tous (?), a. (Bot.) Sarmentose.

Sarn (?), n. [W. sarn a causeway, paving.] A pavement or
stepping-stone. [Prov. Eng.] Johnson.

||Sa"rong (?), n. [Malay srung.] A sort of petticoat worn by both sexes
||in Java and the Malay Archipelago. Balfour (Cyc. of India)

Sa"ros (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;] (Astron) A Chaldean astronomical
period or cycle, the length of which has been variously estimated from
3,600 years to 3,600 days, or a little short of 10 years. Brande & C.

Sar"plar (?), n. [Cf. LL. sarplare. See Sarplier.] A large bale or
package of wool, containing eighty tods, or 2,240 pounds, in weight.
[Eng.]

Sar"plier (?), n. [F. serpillière; cf. Pr. sarpelheira, LL.
serpelleria, serpleria, Catalan sarpallera, Sp. arpillera.] A coarse
cloth made of hemp, and used for packing goods, etc. [Written also
sarpelere.] Tyrwhitt.

Sar"po (?), n. [Corruption of Sp. sapo a toad.] (Zoöl.) A large
toadfish of the Southern United States and the Gulf of Mexico
(Batrachus tau, var. pardus).

||Sar`ra*ce"ni*a (?), n. [NL. So named after a Dr. Sarrazin of Quebec.]
||(Bot.) A genus of American perennial herbs growing in bogs; the
||American pitcher plant.

They have hollow pitcher-shaped or tubular leaves, and solitary flowers
with an umbrella-shaped style. Sarracenia purpurea, the sidesaddle
flower, is common at the North; S. flava, rubra, Drummondii,
variolaris, and psittacina are Southern species. All are insectivorous,
catching and drowning insects in their curious leaves. See Illust. of
Sidesaddle flower, under Sidesaddle.

{ Sar"ra*sin, Sar"ra*sine } (?), n. [F. sarrasine, LL. saracina. See
Saracen.] (Fort.) A portcullis, or herse. [Written also sarasin.]

Sar"sa (?), n. Sarsaparilla. [Written also sarza.]

Sar`sa*pa*ril"la (?), n. [Sp. zarzaparrilla; zarza a bramble (perhaps
fr. Bisc. zartzia) + parra a vine, or Parillo, a physician said to have
discovered it.] (Bot.) (a) Any plant of several tropical American
species of Smilax. (b) The bitter mucilaginous roots of such plants,
used in medicine and in sirups for soda, etc.

The name is also applied to many other plants and their roots,
especially to the Aralia nudicaulis, the wild sarsaparilla of the
United States.

Sar`sa*pa*ril"lin (?), n. See Parillin.

Sarse (?), n. [F. sas, OF. saas, LL. setatium, fr. L. seta a stiff
hair.] A fine sieve; a searce. [Obs.]

Sarse, v. t. To sift through a sarse. [Obs.]

Sar"sen (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain; perhaps for saracen stone, i.e., a
heathen or pagan stone or monument.] One of the large sandstone blocks
scattered over the English chalk downs; -- called also sarsen stone,
and Druid stone. [Eng.]

Sarse"net (?), n. See Sarcenet.

Sart (?), n. An assart, or clearing. [Obs.] Bailey.

Sar*to"ri*al (?), a. [See Sartorius.] 1. Of or pertaining to a tailor
or his work.

    Our legs skulked under the table as free from sartorial
    impertinences as those of the noblest savages.


Lowell.

2. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sartorius muscle.

||Sar*to"ri*us (?), n. [NL., fr. L. sartor a patcher, tailor, fr.
||sarcire, sartum, to patch, mend.] (Anat.) A muscle of the thigh,
||called the tailor's muscle, which arises from the hip bone and is
||inserted just below the knee. So named because its contraction was
||supposed to produce the position of the legs assumed by the tailor in
||sitting.

Sa"rum use` (?). (Ch. of Eng.) A liturgy, or use, put forth about 1087
by St. Osmund, bishop of Sarum, based on Anglo-Saxon and Norman
customs.

Sash (?), n. [Pers. shast a sort of girdle.] A scarf or band worn about
the waist, over the shoulder, or otherwise; a belt; a girdle, -- worn
by women and children as an ornament; also worn as a badge of
distinction by military officers, members of societies, etc.

Sash, v. t. To adorn with a sash or scarf. Burke.

Sash, n. [F. châssis a frame, sash, fr. châsse a shrine, reliquary,
frame, L. capsa. See Case a box.] 1. The framing in which the panes of
glass are set in a glazed window or door, including the narrow bars
between the panes.

2. In a sawmill, the rectangular frame in which the saw is strained and
by which it is carried up and down with a reciprocating motion; -- also
called gate.

French sash, a casement swinging on hinges; - - in distinction from a
vertical sash sliding up and down.

Sash, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sashed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sashing.] To
furnish with a sash or sashes; as, to sash a door or a window.

Sash"er*y (?), n. [From 1st Sash.] A collection of sashes;
ornamentation by means of sashes. [R.]

    Distinguished by their sasheries and insignia.


Carlyle.

Sash"oon (?), n. [Etymology uncertain.] A kind of pad worn on the leg
under the boot. [Obs.] Nares.

Sa"sin (?), n. (Zoöl.) The Indian antelope (Antilope bezoartica, or
cervicapra), noted for its beauty and swiftness. It has long, spiral,
divergent horns.

{ Sas"sa*by (?), Sas"sa*bye (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) A large African antelope
(Alcelaphus lunata), similar to the hartbeest, but having its horns
regularly curved.

Sas"sa*fras (?), n. [F. sassafras (cf. It. sassafrasso, sassafras, Sp.
sasafras, salsafras, salsifrax, salsifragia, saxifragia), fr. L.
saxifraga saxifrage. See Saxifrage.] (Bot.) An American tree of the
Laurel family (Sassafras officinale); also, the bark of the roots,
which has an aromatic smell and taste.

Australian sassafras, a lofty tree (Doryophora Sassafras) with aromatic
bark and leaves. -- Chilian sassafras, an aromatic tree (Laurelia
sempervirens). -- New Zealand sassafras, a similar tree (Laurelia Novæ
Zelandiæ). - - Sassafras nut. See Pichurim bean. -- Swamp sassafras,
the sweet bay (Magnolia glauca). See Magnolia.

Sas"sa*nage (?), n. [See Sarse a sieve.] Stones left after sifting.
Smart.

Sas`sa*ra"ra (?), n. [Perh. a corruption of certiorari, the name of a
writ.] A word used to emphasize a statement. [Obs.]

    Out she shall pack, with a sassarara.


Goldsmith.

Sasse (?), n. [D. sas, fr. F. sas the basin of a waterfall.] A sluice
or lock, as in a river, to make it more navigable. [Obs.] Pepys.

Sas"sen*ach (?), n. [Gael. sasunnach.] A Saxon; an Englishman; a
Lowlander. [Celtic] Sir W. Scott.

{ Sas"so*lin (?), Sas"so*line (?) }, n. [From Sasso, a town in Italy:
cf. F. sassolin.] (Min.) Native boric acid, found in saline
incrustations on the borders of hot springs near Sasso, in the
territory of Florence.

{ Sas"so*rol (?), Sas`so*rol"la (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) The rock pigeon. See
under Pigeon.

Sas"sy bark` (?). (Bot.) The bark of a West African leguminous tree
(Erythrophlæum Guineense, used by the natives as an ordeal poison, and
also medicinally; -- called also mancona bark.

||Sas"tra (?), n. Same as Shaster.

Sat (?), imp. of Sit. [Written also sate.]

Sa"tan (?), n. [Heb. stn an adversary, fr. stan to be adverse, to
persecute: cf. Gr. &?;, &?;, L. Satan, Satanas.] The grand adversary of
man; the Devil, or Prince of darkness; the chief of the fallen angels;
the archfiend.

    I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven.


Luke x. 18.

{ Sa*tan"ic (?), Sa*tan"ic*al (?) }, a. [Cf. F. satanique, Gr. &?;.] Of
or pertaining to Satan; having the qualities of Satan; resembling
Satan; extremely malicious or wicked; devilish; infernal. "Satanic
strength." "Satanic host." Milton.

    Detest the slander which, with a Satanic smile, exults over the
    character it has ruined.


Dr. T. Dwight.

-- Sa*tan"ic*al*ly, adv. -- Sa*tan"ic*al*ness, n.

Sa"tan*ism (?), n. The evil and malicious disposition of Satan; a
diabolical spirit. [R.]

Sa"tan*ist, n. A very wicked person. [R.] Granger.

Sa`tan*oph"a*ny (?), n. [Satan + Gr. &?; to appear.] An incarnation of
Satan; a being possessed by a demon. [R.] O. A. Brownson.

Satch"el (?) n. [OF. sachel, fr. L. saccellus, dim. of saccus. See Sack
a bag.] A little sack or bag for carrying papers, books, or small
articles of wearing apparel; a hand bag. [Spelled also sachel.]

    The whining schoolboy with his satchel.


Shak.

Sate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sated; p. pr. & vb. n. Sating.] [Probably
shortened fr. satiate: cf. L. satur full. See Satiate.] To satisfy the
desire or appetite of; to satiate; to glut; to surfeit.

    Crowds of wanderers sated with the business and pleasure of great
    cities.


Macaulay.

Sate (?), imp. of Sit.

    But sate an equal guest at every board.


Lowell.

Sat*een" (?), n. [Cf. Satin.] A kind of dress goods made of cotton or
woolen, with a glossy surface resembling satin.

Sate"less (?), a. Insatiable. [R.] Young.

Sat"el*lite (?), n. [F., fr. L. satelles, -itis, an attendant.] 1. An
attendant attached to a prince or other powerful person; hence, an
obsequious dependent. "The satellites of power." I. Disraeli.

2. (Astron.) A secondary planet which revolves about another planet;
as, the moon is a satellite of the earth. See Solar system, under
Solar.

Satellite moth (Zoöl.), a handsome European noctuid moth (Scopelosoma
satellitia).

Sat"el*lite, a. (Anat.) Situated near; accompanying; as, the satellite
veins, those which accompany the arteries.

Sat`el*li"tious (?), a. Pertaining to, or consisting of, satellites.
[R.] Cheyne.

Sath"an*as (?), n. [L. Satanas. See Satan] Satan. [Obs.] Chaucer.
Wyclif.

Sa"ti*ate (?), a. [L. satiatus, p. p. of satiare to satisfy, from sat,
satis, enough. See Sad, a., and cf. Sate.] Filled to satiety; glutted;
sated; -- followed by with or of. "Satiate of applause." Pope.

Sa"ti*ate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Satiated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Satiating.] 1. To satisfy the appetite or desire of; to feed to the
full; to furnish enjoyment to, to the extent of desire; to sate; as, to
satiate appetite or sense.

    These [smells] rather woo the sense than satiate it.


Bacon.

    I may yet survive the malice of my enemies, although they should be
    satiated with my blood.


Eikon Basilike.

2. To full beyond natural desire; to gratify to repletion or loathing;
to surfeit; to glut.

3. To saturate. [Obs.] Sir I. Newton.

Syn. -- To satisfy; sate; suffice; cloy; gorge; overfill; surfeit;
glut. -- Satiate, Satisfy, Content. These words differ principally in
degree. To content is to make contented, even though every desire or
appetite is not fully gratified. To satisfy is to appease fully the
longings of desire. To satiate is to fill so completely that it is not
possible to receive or enjoy more; hence, to overfill; to cause disgust
in.

    Content with science in the vale of peace.


Pope.

    His whole felicity is endless strife; No peace, no satisfaction,
    crowns his life.


Beaumont.

    He may be satiated, but not satisfied.


Norris.

Sa`ti*a"tion (?), n. Satiety.

Sa*ti"e*ty (?), n. [L. satietas, from satis, sat, enough: cf. F.
satiété.] The state of being satiated or glutted; fullness of
gratification, either of the appetite or of any sensual desire;
fullness beyond desire; an excess of gratification which excites
wearisomeness or loathing; repletion; satiation.

    In all pleasures there is satiety.


Hakewill.

    But thy words, with grace divine Imbued, bring to their sweetness
    no satiety.


Milton.

Syn. -- Repletion; satiation; surfeit; cloyment.

Sat"in (?), n. [F. satin (cf. Pg. setim), fr. It. setino, from seta
silk, L. saeta, seta, a thick, stiff hair, a bristle; or possibly
ultimately of Chinese origin; cf. Chin. sz-tün, sz- twan. Cf. Sateen.]
A silk cloth, of a thick, close texture, and overshot woof, which has a
glossy surface.

    Cloths of gold and satins rich of hue.


Chaucer.

Denmark satin, a kind of lasting; a stout worsted stuff, woven with a
satin twill, used for women's shoes. -- Farmer's satin. See under
Farmer. -- Satin bird (Zoöl.), an Australian bower bird. Called also
satin grackle. -- Satin flower (Bot.) See Honesty, 4. -- Satin spar.
(Min.) (a) A fine fibrous variety of calcite, having a pearly luster.
(b) A similar variety of gypsum. -- Satin sparrow (Zoöl.), the shining
flycatcher (Myiagra nitida) of Tasmania and Australia. The upper
surface of the male is rich blackish green with a metallic luster. --
Satin stone, satin spar.

Sat`i*net" (?), n. [F., fr. satin. See Satin.] 1. A thin kind of satin.

2. A kind of cloth made of cotton warp and woolen filling, used chiefly
for trousers.

Sat"in*wood` (?), n. (Bot.) The hard, lemon-colored, fragrant wood of
an East Indian tree (Chloroxylon Swietenia). It takes a lustrous
finish, and is used in cabinetwork. The name is also given to the wood
of a species of prickly ash (Xanthoxylum Caribæum) growing in Florida
and the West Indies.

Sat"in*y (?), a. Like or composed of satin; glossy; as, to have a
satiny appearance; a satiny texture.

Sa"tion (?), n. [L. satio, fr. serere, satum, to sow.] A sowing or
planting. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sat"ire (?; in Eng. often &?;; 277), n. [L. satira, satura, fr. satura
(sc. lanx) a dish filled with various kinds of fruits, food composed of
various ingredients, a mixture, a medley, fr. satur full of food,
sated, fr. sat, satis, enough: cf. F. satire. See Sate, Sad, a., and
cf. Saturate.] 1. A composition, generally poetical, holding up vice or
folly to reprobation; a keen or severe exposure of what in public or
private morals deserves rebuke; an invective poem; as, the Satires of
Juvenal.

2. Keeness and severity of remark; caustic exposure to reprobation;
trenchant wit; sarcasm.

Syn. -- Lampoon; sarcasm; irony; ridicule; pasquinade; burlesque; wit;
humor.

{ Sa*tir"ic (?), Sa*tir"ic*al (?) }, a. [L. satiricus: cf. F.
satirique.] 1. Of or pertaining to satire; of the nature of satire; as,
a satiric style.

2. Censorious; severe in language; sarcastic; insulting. "Satirical
rogue." Shak.

Syn. -- Cutting; caustic; poignant; sarcastic; ironical; bitter;
reproachful; abusive.

-- Sa*tir"ic*al*ly, adv. -- Sa*tir"ic*al*ness, n.

Sat"ir*ist (?), n. [Cf. F. satiriste.] One who satirizes; especially,
one who writes satire.

    The mighty satirist, who . . . had spread terror through the Whig
    ranks.


Macaulay.

Sat"ir*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Satirized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Satirizing (?).] [Cf. F. satiriser.] To make the object of satire; to
attack with satire; to censure with keenness or severe sarcasm.

    It is as hard to satirize well a man of distinguished vices, as to
    praise well a man of distinguished virtues.


Swift.

Sat`is*fac"tion (?), n. [OE. satisfaccioun, F. satisfaction, fr. L.
satisfactio, fr. satisfacere to satisfy. See Satisfy.] 1. The act of
satisfying, or the state of being satisfied; gratification of desire;
contentment in possession and enjoyment; repose of mind resulting from
compliance with its desires or demands.

    The mind having a power to suspend the execution and satisfaction
    of any of its desires.


Locke.

2. Settlement of a claim, due, or demand; payment; indemnification;
adequate compensation.

    We shall make full satisfaction.


Shak.

3. That which satisfies or gratifies; atonement.

    Die he, or justice must; unless for him Some other, able, and as
    willing, pay The rigid satisfaction, death for death.


Milton.

Syn. -- Contentment; content; gratification; pleasure; recompense;
compensation; amends; remuneration; indemnification; atonement.

Sat`is*fac"tive (?), a. Satisfactory. [Obs.]

    Satisfactive discernment of fish.


Sir T. Browne.

Sat`is*fac"to*ry (?), a. [Cf. F. satisfactoire.] 1. Giving or producing
satisfaction; yielding content; especially, relieving the mind from
doubt or uncertainty, and enabling it to rest with confidence;
sufficient; as, a satisfactory account or explanation.

2. Making amends, indemnification, or recompense; causing to cease from
claims and to rest content; compensating; atoning; as, to make
satisfactory compensation, or a satisfactory apology.

    A most wise and sufficient means of redemption and salvation, by
    the satisfactory and meritorious death and obedience of the
    incarnate Son of God, Jesus Christ.


Bp. Sanderson.

-- Sat`is*fac"to*ri*ly (#), adv. -- Sat`is*fac"to*ri*ness, n.

Sat"is*fi`a*ble, a. That may be satisfied.

Sat"is*fi`er (?), n. One who satisfies.

Sat"is*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Satisfied (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Satisfying (?).] [OF. satisfier; L. satis enough + -ficare (in comp.)
to make; cf. F. satisfaire, L. satisfacere. See Sad, a., and Fact.] 1.
In general, to fill up the measure of a want of (a person or a thing);
hence, to grafity fully the desire of; to make content; to supply to
the full, or so far as to give contentment with what is wished for.

    Death shall . . . with us two Be forced to satisfy his ravenous
    maw.


Milton.

2. To pay to the extent of claims or deserts; to give what is due to;
as, to satisfy a creditor.

3. To answer or discharge, as a claim, debt, legal demand, or the like;
to give compensation for; to pay off; to requite; as, to satisfy a
claim or an execution.

4. To free from doubt, suspense, or uncertainty; to give assurance to;
to set at rest the mind of; to convince; as, to satisfy one's self by
inquiry.

    The standing evidences of the truth of the gospel are in themselves
    most firm, solid, and satisfying.


Atterbury.

Syn. -- To satiate; sate; content; grafity; compensate. See Satiate.

Sat"is*fy (?), v. i. 1. To give satisfaction; to afford gratification;
to leave nothing to be desired.

2. To make payment or atonement; to atone. Milton.

Sat"is*fy`ing*ly (?), adv. So as to satisfy; satisfactorily.

Sa"tive (?), a. [L. sativus, fr. serere, satum, to sow.] Sown;
propagated by seed. [Obs.] Evelyn.

Sa"tle (?), v. t. & i. To settle. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sa"trap (? or ?; 277), n. [L. satrapes, Gr. &?;, fr. OPers.
khshatrapvan ruler: cf. F. satrape.] The governor of a province in
ancient Persia; hence, a petty autocrat despot.

Sa"trap*al (? or ?), a. Of or pertaining to a satrap, or a satrapy.

Sa"trap*ess (? or ?), n. A female satrap.

Sa*trap"ic*al (?), a. Satrapal. [R.]

Sa"trap*y (?; 277), n.; pl. Satrapies (#). [L. satrapia, satrapea, Gr.
&?;: cf. F. satrapie.] The government or jurisdiction of a satrap; a
principality. Milton.

Sat"su*ma ware" (? or ?). (Fine Arts) A kind of ornamental hard-glazed
pottery made at Satsuma in Kiushu, one of the Japanese islands.

Sat"u*ra*ble (?; 135), a. [L. saturabilis: cf. F. saturable.] Capable
of being saturated; admitting of saturation. -- Sat`u*ra*bil"i*ty (#),
n.

Sat"u*rant (?), a. [L. saturans, p. pr. See Saturate.] Impregnating to
the full; saturating.

Sat"u*rant, n. 1. (Chem.) A substance used to neutralize or saturate
the affinity of another substance.

2. (Med.) An antacid, as magnesia, used to correct acidity of the
stomach.

Sat"u*rate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saturated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Saturating.] [L. saturatus, p. p. of saturare to saturate, fr. satur
full of food, sated. See Satire.] 1. To cause to become completely
penetrated, impregnated, or soaked; to fill fully; to sate.

    Innumerable flocks and herds covered that vast expanse of emerald
    meadow saturated with the moisture of the Atlantic.


Macaulay.

    Fill and saturate each kind With good according to its mind.


Emerson.

2. (Chem.) To satisfy the affinity of; to cause to become inert by
chemical combination with all that it can hold; as, to saturate
phosphorus with chlorine.

Sat"u*rate (?), p. a. [L. saturatus, p. p.] Filled to repletion;
saturated; soaked.

    Dries his feathers saturate with dew.


Cowper.

    The sand beneath our feet is saturate With blood of martyrs.


Longfellow.

Sat"u*ra`ted (?), a. 1. Filled to repletion; holding by absorption, or
in solution, all that is possible; as, saturated garments; a saturated
solution of salt.

2. (Chem.) Having its affinity satisfied; combined with all it can
hold; -- said of certain atoms, radicals, or compounds; thus, methane
is a saturated compound. Contrasted with unsaturated.

A saturated compound may exchange certain ingredients for others, but
can not take on more without such exchange.

Saturated color (Optics), a color not diluted with white; a pure
unmixed color, like those of the spectrum.

Sat`u*ra"tion (?), n. [L. saturatio: cf. F. saturation.] 1. The act of
saturating, or the state of being saturating; complete penetration or
impregnation.

2. (Chem.) The act, process, or result of saturating a substance, or of
combining it to its fullest extent.

3. (Optics) Freedom from mixture or dilution with white; purity; --
said of colors.

The degree of saturation of a color is its relative purity, or freedom
from admixture with white.

Sat"u*ra`tor (?), n. [L.] One who, or that which, saturates.

Sat"ur*day (?; 48), n. [OE. Saterday, AS. Sæterdæg, Sæterndæg,
Sæternesdæg, literally, Saturn's day, fr. L. Saturnus Saturn + AS. dæg
day; cf. L. dies Saturni.] The seventh or last day of the week; the day
following Friday and preceding Sunday.

Sa*tu"ri*ty (?), n. [L. saturitas, fr. satur full of food, sated.] The
state of being saturated; fullness of supply. [Obs.] Warner.

Sa"turn (?), n. [L. Saturnus, literally, the sower, fr. serere, satum,
to sow. See Season.] 1. (Roman Myth.) One of the elder and principal
deities, the son of Cœlus and Terra (Heaven and Earth), and the father
of Jupiter. The corresponding Greek divinity was Kro`nos, later
CHro`nos, Time.

2. (Astron.) One of the planets of the solar system, next in magnitude
to Jupiter, but more remote from the sun. Its diameter is seventy
thousand miles, its mean distance from the sun nearly eight hundred and
eighty millions of miles, and its year, or periodical revolution round
the sun, nearly twenty-nine years and a half. It is surrounded by a
remarkable system of rings, and has eight satellites.

3. (Alchem.) The metal lead. [Archaic]

Sat`ur*na"li*a (?), n. pl. [L. See Saturn.] 1. (Rom. Antiq.) The
festival of Saturn, celebrated in December, originally during one day,
but afterward during seven days, as a period of unrestrained license
and merriment for all classes, extending even to the slaves.

2. Hence: A period or occasion of general license, in which the
passions or vices have riotous indulgence.

Sat`ur*na"li*an (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to the Saturnalia.

2. Of unrestrained and intemperate jollity; riotously merry; dissolute.
"Saturnalian amusement." Burke.

Sa*tur"ni*an (?), a. [L. Saturnius.] 1. (Roman Myth.) Of or pertaining
to Saturn, whose age or reign, from the mildness and wisdom of his
government, is called the golden age.

2. Hence: Resembling the golden age; distinguished for peacefulness,
happiness, contentment.

    Augustus, born to bring Saturnian times.


Pope.

3. (Astron.) Of or pertaining to the planet Saturn; as, the Saturnian
year.

Saturnian verse (Pros.), a meter employed by early Roman satirists,
consisting of three iambics and an extra syllable followed by three
trochees, as in the line: -- Th quen | ws n | th ktch | n || atng |
brad nd | hny.

Sa*tur"ni*an, n. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of large handsome
moths belonging to Saturnia and allied genera. The luna moth,
polyphemus, and promethea, are examples. They belong to the Silkworn
family, and some are raised for their silk. See Polyphemus.

Sat`urn*i*cen"tric (?), a. (Astron.) Appearing as if seen from the
center of the planet Saturn; relating or referred to Saturn as a
center.

Sat"ur*nine (?), a. [L. Saturnus the god Saturn, also, the planet
Saturn: cf. F. saturnin of or pertaining to lead (Saturn, in old
chemistry, meaning lead), saturnien saturnine, saturnian. See Saturn.]
1. Born under, or influenced by, the planet Saturn.

2. Heavy; grave; gloomy; dull; -- the opposite of mercurial; as, a
saturnine person or temper. Addison.

3. (Old Chem.) Of or pertaining to lead; characterized by, or
resembling, lead, which was formerly called Saturn. [Archaic]

Saturnine colic (Med.), lead colic.

Sat"ur*nism (?), n. (Med.) Plumbism. Quain.

Sat"ur*nist (?), n. A person of a dull, grave, gloomy temperament. W.
Browne.

Sa"tyr (?; 277), n. [L. satyrus, Gr. &?;: cf. F. satyre.] 1. (Class.
Myth.) A sylvan deity or demigod, represented as part man and part
goat, and characterized by riotous merriment and lasciviousness.

    Rough Satyrs danced; and Fauns, with cloven heel, From the glad
    sound would not be absent long.


Milton.

2. (Zoöl.) Any one of many species of butterflies belonging to the
family Nymphalidæ. Their colors are commonly brown and gray, often with
ocelli on the wings. Called also meadow browns.

3. (Zoöl.) The orang- outang.

||Sat`y*ri"a*sis (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;. See Satyr.] Immoderate
||venereal appetite in the male. Quain.

{ Sa*tyr"ic (?), Sa*tyr"ic*al (?) }, a. [L. satyricus, Gr. satyriko`s.]
Of or pertaining to satyrs; burlesque; as, satyric tragedy. P. Cyc.

||Sa*tyr"i*on (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. saty`rion.] (Bot.) Any one of
||several kinds of orchids. [Obs.]

Sau"ba ant` (?). (Zoöl.) A South American ant (Œcodoma cephalotes)
remarkable for having two large kinds of workers besides the ordinary
ones, and for the immense size of its formicaries. The sauba ant cuts
off leaves of plants and carries them into its subterranean nests, and
thus often does great damage by defoliating trees and cultivated
plants.

Sauce (?), n. [F., fr. OF. sausse, LL. salsa, properly, salt pickle,
fr. L. salsus salted, salt, p. p. of salire to salt, fr. sal salt. See
Salt, and cf. Saucer, Souse pickle, Souse to plunge.] 1. A composition
of condiments and appetizing ingredients eaten with food as a relish;
especially, a dressing for meat or fish or for puddings; as, mint
sauce; sweet sauce, etc. "Poignant sauce." Chaucer.

    High sauces and rich spices fetched from the Indies.


Sir S. Baker.

2. Any garden vegetables eaten with meat. [Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U.S.]
Forby. Bartlett.

    Roots, herbs, vine fruits, and salad flowers . . . they dish up
    various ways, and find them very delicious sauce to their meats,
    both roasted and boiled, fresh and salt.


Beverly.

3. Stewed or preserved fruit eaten with other food as a relish; as,
apple sauce, cranberry sauce, etc. [U.S.] "Stewed apple sauce." Mrs.
Lincoln (Cook Book).

4. Sauciness; impertinence. [Low.] Haliwell.

To serve one the same sauce, to retaliate in the same kind. [Vulgar]

Sauce (ss), v. t. [Cf. F. saucer.] [imp. & p. p. Sauced (sst); p. pr. &
vb. n. Saucing (s"sng).] 1. To accompany with something intended to
give a higher relish; to supply with appetizing condiments; to season;
to flavor.

2. To cause to relish anything, as if with a sauce; to tickle or
gratify, as the palate; to please; to stimulate; hence, to cover,
mingle, or dress, as if with sauce; to make an application to. [R.]

    Earth, yield me roots; Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his
    palate With thy most operant poison!


Shak.

3. To make poignant; to give zest, flavor or interest to; to set off;
to vary and render attractive.

    Then fell she to sauce her desires with threatenings.


Sir P. Sidney.

    Thou sayest his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings.


Shak.

4. To treat with bitter, pert, or tart language; to be impudent or
saucy to. [Colloq. or Low]

    I'll sauce her with bitter words.


Shak.

||Sauce (ss), n. [F.] (Fine Art) A soft crayon for use in stump drawing
||or in shading with the stump.

Sauce"-a*lone` (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] (Bot.) Jack-by-the-hedge.
See under Jack.

Sauce"box` (?), n. [See Sauce, and Saucy.] A saucy, impudent person;
especially, a pert child.

    Saucebox, go, meddle with your lady's fan, And prate not here!


A. Brewer.

Sauce"pan` (?), n. A small pan with a handle, in which sauce is
prepared over a fire; a stewpan.

Sau"cer (?), n. [F. saucière, from sauce. See Sauce.] 1. A small pan or
vessel in which sauce was set on a table. [Obs.] Bacon.

2. A small dish, commonly deeper than a plate, in which a cup is set at
table.

3. Something resembling a saucer in shape. Specifically: (a) A flat,
shallow caisson for raising sunken ships. (b) A shallow socket for the
pivot of a capstan.

Sau"ci*ly (?), adv. In a saucy manner; impudently; with impertinent
boldness. Addison.

Sau"ci*ness, n. The quality or state of being saucy; that which is
saucy; impertinent boldness; contempt of superiors; impudence.

    Your sauciness will jest upon my love.


Shak.

Syn. -- Impudence; impertinence; rudeness; insolence. See Impudence.

{ ||Sau`cis`son" (?), Sau`cisse" (?) }, n. [F., fr. saucisse sausage.
See Sausage.] 1. (Mining or Gun.) A long and slender pipe or bag, made
of cloth well pitched, or of leather, filled with powder, and used to
communicate fire to mines, caissons, bomb chests, etc.

2. (Fort.) A fascine of more than ordinary length.

Sau"cy (?), a. [Compar. Saucier (?); superl. Sauciest.] [From Sauce.]
1. Showing impertinent boldness or pertness; transgressing the rules of
decorum; treating superiors with contempt; impudent; insolent; as, a
saucy fellow.

    Am I not protector, saucy priest?


Shak.

2. Expressive of, or characterized by, impudence; impertinent; as, a
saucy eye; saucy looks.

    We then have done you bold and saucy wrongs.


Shak.

Syn. -- Impudent; insolent; impertinent; rude.

Sauer"kraut` (?), n. [G., fr. sauer sour + kraut herb, cabbage.]
Cabbage cut fine and allowed to ferment in a brine made of its own
juice with salt, -- a German dish.

Sauf (?), a. Safe. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sauf, conj. & prep. Save; except. [Obs.] "Sauf I myself." Chaucer.

Sauf"ly, adv. Safely. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sau"ger (?), n. (Zoöl.) An American fresh-water food fish (Stizostedion
Canadense); -- called also gray pike, blue pike, hornfish, land pike,
sand pike, pickering, and pickerel.

{ Saugh, Sauh (?) }, obs. imp. sing. of See. Chaucer.

Sauks (?), n. pl. (Ethnol.) Same as Sacs.

Saul (?), n. Soul. [Obs.]

Saul, n. Same as Sal, the tree.

Sau"lie (?), n. A hired mourner at a funeral. [Scot.] Sir W. Scott.

||Sault (?), n. [OF., F. saut, fr. L. saltus. See Salt a leap.] A rapid
||in some rivers; as, the Sault Ste. Marie. [U.S.] Bartlett.

Saun"ders (?), n. See Sandress.

Saun"ders-blue` (?), n. [Corrupted fr. F. cendres bleues blue ashes.] A
kind of color prepared from calcined lapis lazuli; ultramarine; also, a
blue prepared from carbonate of copper. [Written also sanders-blue.]

Saun"ter (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sauntered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sauntering.] [Written also santer.] [Probably fr. F. s'aventurer to
adventure (one's self), through a shortened form s'auntrer. See
Adventure, n. & v.] To wander or walk about idly and in a leisurely or
lazy manner; to lounge; to stroll; to loiter.

    One could lie under elm trees in a lawn, or saunter in meadows by
    the side of a stream.


Masson.

Syn. -- To loiter; linger; stroll; wander.

Saun"ter, n. A sauntering, or a sauntering place.

    That wheel of fops, that saunter of the town.


Young.

Saun"ter*er (?), n. One who saunters.

Saur (?), n. [Contracted from Gael. salachar filth, nastiness, fr.
salach nasty, fr. sal filth, refuse.] Soil; dirt; dirty water; urine
from a cowhouse. [Prov. Eng.]

Sau"rel (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any carangoid fish of the genus Trachurus,
especially T. trachurus, or T. saurus, of Europe and America, and T.
picturatus of California. Called also skipjack, and horse mackerel.

||Sau"ri*a (?), n. pl. [NL., from Gr. &?; a lizard.] (Zoöl.) A division
||of Reptilia formerly established to include the Lacertilia,
||Crocodilia, Dinosauria, and other groups. By some writers the name is
||restricted to the Lacertilia.

Sau"ri*an (?), a. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to, or of the nature of, the
Sauria. -- n. One of the Sauria.

Sau"ri*oid (?), a. (Zoöl.) Same as Sauroid.

||Sau"ro*ba*tra"chi*a (?), n. pl. [NL. See Sauria, and Batrachia.]
||(Zoöl.) The Urodela.

Sau*rog"na*thous (?), a. [Gr. &?; a lizard + &?; the jaw.] (Zoöl.)
Having the bones of the palate arranged as in saurians, the vomer
consisting of two lateral halves, as in the woodpeckers (Pici).

Sau"roid (?), a. [Gr. &?; a lizard + -oid: cf. Gr. &?; lizardlike.]
(Zoöl.) (a) Like or pertaining to the saurians. (b) Resembling a
saurian superficially; as, a sauroid fish.

Sau`roid*ich"nite (?), n. [See Sauroid, and Ichnite.] (Paleon.) The
fossil track of a saurian.

||Sau*rop"o*da (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a lizard + -poda.]
||(Paleon.) An extinct order of herbivorous dinosaurs having the feet
||of a saurian type, instead of birdlike, as they are in many
||dinosaurs. It includes the largest known land animals, belonging to
||Brontosaurus, Camarasaurus, and allied genera. See Illustration in
||Appendix.

||Sau*rop"si*da (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a lizard + &?;
||appearance.] (Zoöl.) A comprehensive group of vertebrates, comprising
||the reptiles and birds.

||Sau*rop`te*ryg"i*a (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a lizard + &?;, &?;,
||a wing.] (Paleon.) Same as Plesiosauria.

||Sau*ru"ræ (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a lizard + &?; a tail.]
||(Paleon.) An extinct order of birds having a long vertebrated tail
||with quills along each side of it. Archæopteryx is the type. See
||Archæopteryx, and Odontornithes.

Sau"ry (?), n.; pl. Sauries (#). [Etymol. uncertain.] (Zoöl.) A slender
marine fish (Scomberesox saurus) of Europe and America. It has long,
thin, beaklike jaws. Called also billfish, gowdnook, gawnook, skipper,
skipjack, skopster, lizard fish, and Egypt herring.

Sau"sage (?; 48), n. [F. saucisse, LL. salcitia, salsicia, fr. salsa.
See Sauce.] 1. An article of food consisting of meat (esp. pork) minced
and highly seasoned, and inclosed in a cylindrical case or skin usually
made of the prepared intestine of some animal.

2. A saucisson. See Saucisson. Wilhelm.

Sau"se*flem (?), a. [OF. saus salt (L. salsus) + flemme phlegm.] Having
a red, pimpled face. [Obs.] [Written also sawceflem.] Chaucer.

Saus"sur*ite (?), n. [F. So called from M. Saussure.] (Min.) A tough,
compact mineral, of a white, greenish, or grayish color. It is near
zoisite in composition, and in part, at least, has been produced by the
alteration of feldspar.

{ Saut, Saute (?) }, n. An assault. [Obs.]

||Sau`te" (?), p. p. of Sauter. C. Owen.

||Sau`ter" (?), v. t. [F., properly, to jump.] To fry lightly and
||quickly, as meat, by turning or tossing it over frequently in a hot
||pan greased with a little fat.

Sau"ter (?), n. Psalter. [Obs.] Piers Plowman.

Sau`te*relle (?), n. [F.] An instrument used by masons and others to
trace and form angles.

Sau`terne" (?), n. [F.] A white wine made in the district of Sauterne,
France.

Sau"trie (?), n. Psaltery. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||Sau`ve*garde" (?), n. [F.] (Zoöl.) The monitor.

Sav"a*ble (?), a. [From Save. Cf. Salvable.] Capable of, or admitting
of, being saved.

    In the person prayed for there ought to be the great disposition of
    being in a savable condition.


Jer. Taylor.

Sav"a*ble*ness, n. Capability of being saved.

Sa*va"ci*oun` (?), n. Salvation. [Obs.]

Sav"age (?; 48), a. [F. sauvage, OF. salvage, fr. L. silvaticus
belonging to a wood, wild, fr. silva a wood. See Silvan, and cf.
Sylvatic.] 1. Of or pertaining to the forest; remote from human abodes
and cultivation; in a state of nature; wild; as, a savage wilderness.

2. Wild; untamed; uncultivated; as, savage beasts.

    Cornels, and savage berries of the wood.


Dryden.

3. Uncivilized; untaught; unpolished; rude; as, savage life; savage
manners.

    What nation, since the commencement of the Christian era, ever rose
    from savage to civilized without Christianity?


E. D. Griffin.

4. Characterized by cruelty; barbarous; fierce; ferocious; inhuman;
brutal; as, a savage spirit.

Syn. -- Ferocious; wild; uncultivated; untamed; untaught; uncivilized;
unpolished; rude; brutish; brutal; heathenish; barbarous; cruel;
inhuman; fierce; pitiless; merciless; unmerciful; atrocious. See
Ferocious.

Sav"age, n. 1. A human being in his native state of rudeness; one who
is untaught, uncivilized, or without cultivation of mind or manners.

2. A man of extreme, unfeeling, brutal cruelty; a barbarian.

Sav"age (?; 48), v. t. To make savage. [R.]

    Its bloodhounds, savaged by a cross of wolf.


Southey.

Sav"age*ly, adv. In a savage manner.

Sav"age*ness, n. The state or quality of being savage.

    Wolves and bears, they say, Casting their savageness aside have
    done Like offices of pity.


Shak.

Sav"age*ry (?; 277), n. [F. sauvagerie.] 1. The state of being savage;
savageness; savagism.

    A like work of primeval savagery.


C. Kingsley.

2. An act of cruelty; barbarity.

    The wildest savagery, the vilest stroke, That ever wall-eyed wrath
    or staring rage Presented to the tears of soft remorse.


Shak.

3. Wild growth, as of plants. Shak.

Sav"a*gism (?), n. The state of being savage; the state of rude,
uncivilized men, or of men in their native wildness and rudeness.

Sav`a*nil"la (?), n. (Zoöl.) The tarpum. [Local, U.S.]

Sa*van"na (?), n. [Of American Indian origin; cf. Sp. sabana, F.
savane.] A tract of level land covered with the vegetable growth
usually found in a damp soil and warm climate, -- as grass or reeds, --
but destitute of trees. [Spelt also savannah.]

    Savannahs are clear pieces of land without woods.


Dampier.

Savanna flower (Bot.), a West Indian name for several climbing
apocyneous plants of the genus Echites. -- Savanna sparrow (Zoöl.), an
American sparrow (Ammodramus sandwichensis or Passerculus savanna) of
which several varieties are found on grassy plains from Alaska to the
Eastern United States. -- Savanna wattle (Bot.), a name of two West
Indian trees of the genus Citharexylum.

||Sa`vant" (?), n.; pl. Savants (F. &?;; E. &?;). [F., fr. savoir to
||know, L. sapere. See Sage, a.] A man of learning; one versed in
||literature or science; a person eminent for acquirements.

Save (?), n. [See Sage the herb.] The herb sage, or salvia. [Obs.]
Chaucer.

Save (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Saved (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Saving.] [OE.
saven, sauven, salven, OF. salver, sauver, F. sauver, L. salvare, fr.
salvus saved, safe. See Safe, a.] 1. To make safe; to procure the
safety of; to preserve from injury, destruction, or evil of any kind;
to rescue from impending danger; as, to save a house from the flames.

    God save all this fair company.


Chaucer.

    He cried, saying, Lord, save me.


Matt. xiv. 30.

    Thou hast . . . quitted all to save A world from utter loss.


Milton.

2. (Theol.) Specifically, to deliver from sin and its penalty; to
rescue from a state of condemnation and spiritual death, and bring into
a state of spiritual life.

    Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.


1 Tim. i. 15.

3. To keep from being spent or lost; to secure from waste or
expenditure; to lay up; to reserve.

    Now save a nation, and now save a groat.


Pope.

4. To rescue from something undesirable or hurtful; to prevent from
doing something; to spare.

    I'll save you That labor, sir. All's now done.


Shak.

5. To hinder from doing, suffering, or happening; to obviate the
necessity of; to prevent; to spare.

    Will you not speak to save a lady's blush?


Dryden.

6. To hold possession or use of; to escape loss of.

    Just saving the tide, and putting in a stock of merit.


Swift.

To save appearances, to preserve a decent outside; to avoid exposure of
a discreditable state of things.

Syn. -- To preserve; rescue; deliver; protect; spare; reserve; prevent.

Save, v. i. To avoid unnecessary expense or expenditure; to prevent
waste; to be economical.

    Brass ordnance saveth in the quantity of the material.


Bacon.

Save, prep. or conj. [F. sauf, properly adj., safe. See Safe, a.]
Except; excepting; not including; leaving out; deducting; reserving;
saving.

    Five times received I forty stripes save one.


2 Cor. xi. 24.

Syn. -- See Except.

Save, conj. Except; unless.

Save"a*ble (?), a. See Savable.

Save"-all` (?), n. [Save + all.] Anything which saves fragments, or
prevents waste or loss. Specifically: (a) A device in a candlestick to
hold the ends of candles, so that they be burned. (b) (Naut.) A small
sail sometimes set under the foot of another sail, to catch the wind
that would pass under it. Totten.

(c) A trough to prevent waste in a paper-making machine.

Sav"e*loy (?), n. [F. cervelas, It. cervellata, fr. cervello brain, L.
cerebellum, dim. of cerebrum brain. See Cerebral.] A kind of dried
sausage. McElrath.

Save"ly (?), adv. Safely. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Save"ment (?), n. The act of saving. [Obs.]

Sav"er (?), n. One who saves.

{ Sav"in, Sav"ine (?) }, n. [OE. saveine, AS. safinæ, savine, L. sabina
herba. Cf. Sabine.] [Written also sabine.] (Bot.) (a) A coniferous
shrub (Juniperus Sabina) of Western Asia, occasionally found also in
the northern parts of the United States and in British America. It is a
compact bush, with dark-colored foliage, and produces small berries
having a glaucous bloom. Its bitter, acrid tops are sometimes used in
medicine for gout, amenorrhœa, etc. (b) The North American red cedar
(Juniperus Virginiana.)

Sav"ing (?), a. 1. Preserving; rescuing.

    He is the saving strength of his anointed.


Ps. xxviii. 8.

2. Avoiding unnecessary expense or waste; frugal; not lavish or
wasteful; economical; as, a saving cook.

3. Bringing back in returns or in receipts the sum expended; incurring
no loss, though not gainful; as, a saving bargain; the ship has made a
saving voyage.

4. Making reservation or exception; as, a saving clause.

Saving is often used with a noun to form a compound adjective; as,
labor-saving, life-saving, etc.

Sav"ing (sv"ng), prep. or conj.; but properly a participle. With the
exception of; except; excepting; also, without disrespect to. "Saving
your reverence." Shak. "Saving your presence." Burns.

    None of us put off our clothes, saving that every one put them off
    for washing.


Neh. iv. 23.

    And in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth saving he
    that receiveth it.


Rev. ii. 17.

Sav"ing, n. 1. Something kept from being expended or lost; that which
is saved or laid up; as, the savings of years of economy.

2. Exception; reservation.

    Contend not with those that are too strong for us, but still with a
    saving to honesty.


L'Estrange.

Savings bank, a bank in which savings or earnings are deposited and put
at interest.

Sav"ing*ly, adv. 1. In a saving manner; with frugality or parsimony.

2. So as to be finally saved from eternal death.

    Savingly born of water and the Spirit.


Waterland.

Sav"ing*ness, n. 1. The quality of being saving; carefulness not to
expend money uselessly; frugality; parsimony. Mrs. H. H. Jackson.

2. Tendency to promote salvation. Johnson.

Sav"ior (sv"yr), n. [OE. saveour, OF. salveor, F. sauveur, fr. L.
salvator, fr. salvare to save. See Save, v.] [Written also saviour.] 1.
One who saves, preserves, or delivers from destruction or danger.

2. Specifically: The (or our, your, etc.) Savior, he who brings
salvation to men; Jesus Christ, the Redeemer.

Sav"ior*ess, n. A female savior. [Written also saviouress.] [R.] Bp.
Hall.

Sa"vor (?), n. [OE. savour, savor, savur, OF. savor, savour, F. saveur,
fr. L. sapor, fr. sapere to taste, savor. See Sage, a., and cf. Sapid,
Insipid, Sapor.] [Written also savour.] 1. That property of a thing
which affects the organs of taste or smell; taste and odor; flavor;
relish; scent; as, the savor of an orange or a rose; an ill savor.

    I smell sweet savors and I feel soft things.


Shak.

2. Hence, specific flavor or quality; characteristic property;
distinctive temper, tinge, taint, and the like.

    Why is not my life a continual joy, and the savor of heaven
    perpetually upon my spirit?


Baxter.

3. Sense of smell; power to scent, or trace by scent. [R.] "Beyond my
savor." Herbert.

4. Pleasure; delight; attractiveness. [Obs.]

    She shall no savor have therein but lite.


Chaucer.

Syn. -- Taste; flavor; relish; odor; scent; smell.

Sa"vor, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Savored (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Savoring.]
[Cf. OF. savorer, F. savourer. See Savor, n.] [Written also savour.] 1.
To have a particular smell or taste; -- with of.

2. To partake of the quality or nature; to indicate the presence or
influence; to smack; -- with of.

    This savors not much of distraction.


Shak.

    I have rejected everything that savors of party.


Addison.

3. To use the sense of taste. [Obs.]

    By sight, hearing, smelling, tasting or savoring, and feeling.


Chaucer.

Sa"vor, v. t. 1. To perceive by the smell or the taste; hence, to
perceive; to note. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

2. To have the flavor or quality of; to indicate the presence of. [R.]

    That cuts us off from hope, and savors only Rancor and pride,
    impatience and despite.


Milton.

3. To taste or smell with pleasure; to delight in; to relish; to like;
to favor. [R.] Shak.

Sa"vor*i*ly (?), adv. In a savory manner.

Sa"vor*i*ness, n. The quality of being savory.

Sa"vor*less, a. Having no savor; destitute of smell or of taste;
insipid.

Sa"vor*ly, a. Savory. [Obs.]

Sa"vor*ly, adv. In a savory manner. [Obs.] Barrow.

Sa"vor*ous (-s), a. [Cf. F. savoureux, OF. saveros, L. saporosus. Cf.
Saporous, and see Savor, n.] Having a savor; savory. [Obs.] Rom. of R.

Sa"vor*y (-), a. [From Savor.] Pleasing to the organs of taste or
smell. [Written also savoury.]

    The chewing flocks Had ta'en their supper on the savory herb.


Milton.

Sa"vo*ry (s"v*r), n. [F. savorée; cf. It. santoreggia, satureja, L.
satureia,] (Bot.) An aromatic labiate plant (Satureia hortensis), much
used in cooking; -- also called summer savory. [Written also savoury.]

Sa*voy" (?), n. [F. chou de Savoie cabbage of Savoy.] (Bot.) A variety
of the common cabbage (Brassica oleracea major), having curled leaves,
-- much cultivated for winter use.

Sav`oy*ard" (?), n. [F.] A native or inhabitant of Savoy.

Saw (s), imp. of See.

Saw, n. [OE. sawe, AS. sagu; akin to secgan to say. See Say, v. t. and
cf. Saga.]

1. Something said; speech; discourse. [Obs.] "To hearken all his sawe."
Chaucer.

2. A saying; a proverb; a maxim.

    His champions are the prophets and apostles, His weapons holy saws
    of sacred writ.


Shak.

3. Dictate; command; decree. [Obs.]

    [Love] rules the creatures by his powerful saw.


Spenser.

Saw, n. [OE. sawe, AS. sage; akin to D. zaag, G. säge, OHG. sega, saga,
Dan. sav, Sw. såg, Icel. sög, L. secare to cut, securis ax, secula
sickle. Cf. Scythe, Sickle, Section, Sedge.] An instrument for cutting
or dividing substances, as wood, iron, etc., consisting of a thin
blade, or plate, of steel, with a series of sharp teeth on the edge,
which remove successive portions of the material by cutting and
tearing.

Saw is frequently used adjectively, or as the first part of a compound.

Band saw, Crosscut saw, etc. See under Band, Crosscut, etc. -- Circular
saw, a disk of steel with saw teeth upon its periphery, and revolved on
an arbor. -- Saw bench, a bench or table with a flat top for for
sawing, especially with a circular saw which projects above the table.
-- Saw file, a three-cornered file, such as is used for sharpening saw
teeth. -- Saw frame, the frame or sash in a sawmill, in which the saw,
or gang of saws, is held. -- Saw gate, a saw frame. -- Saw gin, the
form of cotton gin invented by Eli Whitney, in which the cotton fibers
are drawn, by the teeth of a set of revolving circular saws, through a
wire grating which is too fine for the seeds to pass. -- Saw grass
(Bot.), any one of certain cyperaceous plants having the edges of the
leaves set with minute sharp teeth, especially the Cladium Mariscus of
Europe, and the Cladium effusum of the Southern United States. Cf.
Razor grass, under Razor. -- Saw log, a log of suitable size for sawing
into lumber. -- Saw mandrel, a mandrel on which a circular saw is
fastened for running. -- Saw pit, a pit over which timbor is sawed by
two men, one standing below the timber and the other above. Mortimer.
-- Saw sharpener (Zoöl.), the great titmouse; -- so named from its
harsh call note. [Prov. Eng.] -- Saw whetter (Zoöl.), the marsh
titmouse (Parus palustris); -- so named from its call note. [Prov.
Eng.] -- Scroll saw, a ribbon of steel with saw teeth upon one edge,
stretched in a frame and adapted for sawing curved outlines; also, a
machine in which such a saw is worked by foot or power.

Saw (?), v. t. [imp. Sawed (?); p. p. Sawed or Sawn (&?;); p. pr. & vb.
n. Sawing.] 1. To cut with a saw; to separate with a saw; as, to saw
timber or marble.

2. To form by cutting with a saw; as, to saw boards or planks, that is,
to saw logs or timber into boards or planks; to saw shingles; to saw
out a panel.

3. Also used figuratively; as, to saw the air.

Saw, v. i. 1. To use a saw; to practice sawing; as, a man saws well.

2. To cut, as a saw; as, the saw or mill saws fast.

3. To be cut with a saw; as, the timber saws smoothly.

Sa*war"ra nut` (?). See Souari nut.

Saw"bel`ly (?), n. The alewife. [Local, U.S.]

Saw"bill` (?), n. The merganser. [Prov. Eng.]

Saw"bones` (?), n. A nickname for a surgeon.

Saw"buck` (?), n. A sawhorse.

Saw"ce*flem (?), a. See Sauseflem. [Obs.]

Saw"der (?), n. A corrupt spelling and pronunciation of solder.

Soft sawder, seductive praise; flattery; blarney. [Slang]

Saw"dust` (?), n. Dust or small fragments of wood (or of stone, etc.)
made by the cutting of a saw.

Saw"er` (?), n. One who saws; a sawyer.

Saw"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of elasmobranch
fishes of the genus Pristis. They have a sharklike form, but are more
nearly allied to the rays. The flattened and much elongated snout has a
row of stout toothlike structures inserted along each edge, forming a
sawlike organ with which it mutilates or kills its prey.

Saw"fly` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of hymenopterous
insects belonging to the family Tenthredinidæ. The female usually has
an ovipositor containing a pair of sawlike organs with which she makes
incisions in the leaves or stems of plants in which to lay the eggs.
The larvæ resemble those of Lepidoptera.

Saw"horse` (?), n. A kind of rack, shaped like a double St. Andrew's
cross, on which sticks of wood are laid for sawing by hand; -- called
also buck, and sawbuck.

Saw"mill` (?), n. A mill for sawing, especially one for sawing timber
or lumber.

Saw"neb` (?), n. A merganser. [Prov. Eng.]

Saw" pal*met"to. See under Palmetto.

Saw"-set` (?), n. An instrument used to set or turn the teeth of a saw
a little sidewise, that they may make a kerf somewhat wider than the
thickness of the blade, to prevent friction; -- called also saw-wrest.

Saw"tooth` (?), n. (Zoöl.) An arctic seal (Lobodon carcinophaga),
having the molars serrated; -- called also crab-eating seal.

Saw"-toothed" (?), a. Having a tooth or teeth like those of a saw;
serrate.

Saw"try (?), n. A psaltery. [Obs.] Dryden.

Saw"-whet` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A small North American owl (Nyctale
Acadica), destitute of ear tufts and having feathered toes; -- called
also Acadian owl.

Saw"-wort` (?), n. (Bot.) Any plant of the composite genus Serratula;
-- so named from the serrated leaves of most of the species.

Saw"-wrest` (?), n. See Saw- set.

Saw"yer (?), n. [Saw + - yer, as in lawyer. Cf. Sawer.] 1. One whose
occupation is to saw timber into planks or boards, or to saw wood for
fuel; a sawer.

2. A tree which has fallen into a stream so that its branches project
above the surface, rising and falling with a rocking or swaying motion
in the current. [U.S.]

3. (Zoöl.) The bowfin. [Local, U.S.]

Sax (?), n. [AS. seax a knife.] A kind of chopping instrument for
trimming the edges of roofing slates.

Sax"a*tile (?), a. [L. saxatilis, fr. saxum a rock: cf. F. saxatile.]
Of or pertaining to rocks; living among rocks; as, a saxatile plant.

Sax"horn` (?), n. (Mus.) A name given to a numerous family of brass
wind instruments with valves, invented by Antoine Joseph Adolphe Sax
(known as Adolphe Sax), of Belgium and Paris, and much used in military
bands and in orchestras.

Sax`i*ca"va (?), n.; pl. E. saxicavas (#), L. Saxicavæ (#). [NL. See
Saxicavous.] (Zoöl.) Any species of marine bivalve shells of the genus
Saxicava. Some of the species are noted for their power of boring holes
in limestone and similar rocks.

Sax`i*ca"vid (?), a. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the saxicavas. -- n. A
saxicava.

Sax`i*ca"vous (?), a. [L. saxum rock + cavare to make hollow, fr. cavus
hollow: cf. F. saxicave.] (Zoöl.) Boring, or hollowing out, rocks; --
said of certain mollusks which live in holes which they burrow in
rocks. See Illust. of Lithodomus.

Sax*ic"o*line (?), a. [L. saxum a rock + colere to inhabit.] (Zoöl.)
Stone- inhabiting; pertaining to, or having the characteristics of, the
stonechats.

Sax*ic"o*lous (?), a. [See Saxicoline.] (Bot.) Growing on rocks.

||Sax*if"ra*ga (?), n. [L., saxifrage. See Saxifrage.] (Bot.) A genus
||of exogenous polypetalous plants, embracing about one hundred and
||eighty species. See Saxifrage.

Sax`i*fra*ga"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to a natural order
of plants (Saxifragaceæ) of which saxifrage is the type. The order
includes also the alum root, the hydrangeas, the mock orange, currants
and gooseberries, and many other plants.

Sax*if"ra*gant (?), a. [See Saxifrage.] Breaking or destroying stones;
saxifragous. [R.] -- n. That which breaks or destroys stones. [R.]

Sax"i*frage (?; 48), n. [L. saxifraga, from saxifragus stone-breaking;
saxum rock + frangere to break: cf. F. saxifrage. See Fracture, and cf.
Sassafras, Saxon.] (Bot.) Any plant of the genus Saxifraga, mostly
perennial herbs growing in crevices of rocks in mountainous regions.

Burnet saxifrage, a European umbelliferous plant (Pimpinella
Saxifraga). -- Golden saxifrage, a low half-succulent herb
(Chrysosplenium oppositifolium) growing in rivulets in Europe; also, C.
Americanum, common in the United States. See also under Golden. --
Meadow saxifrage, or Pepper saxifrage. See under Meadow.

Sax*if"ra*gous (?), a. [L. saxifragus: cf. F. saxifrage. See
Saxifrage.] Dissolving stone, especially dissolving stone in the
bladder.

Sax"on (sks"n or -'n), n. [L. Saxo, pl. Saxones, from the Saxon
national name; cf. AS. pl. Seaxe, Seaxan, fr. seax a knife, a short
sword, a dagger (akin to OHG. sahs, and perhaps to L. saxum rock,
stone, knives being originally made of stone); and cf. G. Sachse, pl.
Sachsen. Cf. Saxifrage.] 1. (a) One of a nation or people who formerly
dwelt in the northern part of Germany, and who, with other Teutonic
tribes, invaded and conquered England in the fifth and sixth centuries.
(b) Also used in the sense of Anglo- Saxon. (c) A native or inhabitant
of modern Saxony.

2. The language of the Saxons; Anglo- Saxon.

Old Saxon, the Saxon of the continent of Europe in the old form of the
language, as shown particularly in the "Heliand", a metrical narration
of the gospel history preserved in manuscripts of the 9th century.

Sax"on, a. Of or pertaining to the Saxons, their country, or their
language. (b) Anglo-Saxon. (c) Of or pertaining to Saxony or its
inhabitants.

Saxon blue (Dyeing), a deep blue liquid used in dyeing, and obtained by
dissolving indigo in concentrated sulphuric acid. Brande & C. -- Saxon
green (Dyeing), a green color produced by dyeing with yellow upon a
ground of Saxon blue.

Sax*on"ic (?), a. Relating to the Saxons or Anglo- Saxons.

Sax"on*ism (?), n. An idiom of the Saxon or Anglo-Saxon language. T.
Warton.

Sax"on*ist, n. One versed in the Saxon language.

Sax"on*ite (?), n. (Min.) See Mountain soap, under Mountain.

Sax"o*phone (?), n. [A.A.J. Sax, the inventor (see Saxhorn) + Gr. &?;
tone.] (Mus.) A wind instrument of brass, containing a reed, and
partaking of the qualities both of a brass instrument and of a
clarinet.

Sax"-tu`ba (?), n. [See Saxhorn, and Tube.] (Mus.) A powerful
instrument of brass, curved somewhat like the Roman buccina, or tuba.

Say (s), obs. imp. of See. Saw. Chaucer.

Say (s), n. [Aphetic form of assay.] 1. Trial by sample; assay; sample;
specimen; smack. [Obs.]

    If those principal works of God . . . be but certain tastes and
    says, as it were, of that final benefit.


Hooker.

    Thy tongue some say of breeding breathes.


Shak.

2. Tried quality; temper; proof. [Obs.]

    He found a sword of better say.


Spenser.

3. Essay; trial; attempt. [Obs.]

To give a say at, to attempt. B. Jonson.

Say, v. t. To try; to assay. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Say, n. [OE. saie, F. saie, fr. L. saga, equiv. to sagum, sagus, a
coarse woolen mantle; cf. Gr. sa`gos. See Sagum.] 1. A kind of silk or
satin. [Obs.]

    Thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord!


Shak.

2. A delicate kind of serge, or woolen cloth. [Obs.]

    His garment neither was of silk nor say.


Spenser.

Say, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Said (sd), contracted from sayed; p. pr. & vb.
n. Saying.] [OE. seggen, seyen, siggen, sayen, sayn, AS. secgan; akin
to OS. seggian, D. zeggen, LG. seggen, OHG. sagn, G. sagen, Icel.
segja, Sw. säga, Dan. sige, Lith. sakyti; cf. OL. insece tell, relate,
Gr. 'e`nnepe (for 'en-sepe), 'e`spete. Cf. Saga, Saw a saying.] 1. To
utter or express in words; to tell; to speak; to declare; as, he said
many wise things.

    Arise, and say how thou camest here.


Shak.

2. To repeat; to rehearse; to recite; to pronounce; as, to say a
lesson.

    Of my instruction hast thou nothing bated In what thou hadst to
    say?


Shak.

    After which shall be said or sung the following hymn.


Bk. of Com. Prayer.

3. To announce as a decision or opinion; to state positively; to
assert; hence, to form an opinion upon; to be sure about; to be
determined in mind as to.

    But what it is, hard is to say.


Milton.

4. To mention or suggest as an estimate, hypothesis, or approximation;
hence, to suppose; -- in the imperative, followed sometimes by the
subjunctive; as, he had, say fifty thousand dollars; the fox had run,
say ten miles.

    Say, for nonpayment that the debt should double, Is twenty hundred
    kisses such a trouble?


Shak.

It is said, or They say, it is commonly reported; it is rumored; people
assert or maintain. - - That is to say, that is; in other words;
otherwise.

Say, v. i. To speak; to express an opinion; to make answer; to reply.

    You have said; but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.


Shak.

    To this argument we shall soon have said; for what concerns it us
    to hear a husband divulge his household privacies?


Milton.

Say, n. [From Say, v. t.; cf. Saw a saying.] A speech; something said;
an expression of opinion; a current story; a maxim or proverb. [Archaic
or Colloq.]

    He no sooner said out his say, but up rises a cunning snap.


L'Estrange.

    That strange palmer's boding say, That fell so ominous and drear
    Full on the object of his fear.


Sir W. Scott.

Say"er (?), n. One who says; an utterer.

    Mr. Curran was something much better than a sayer of smart sayings.


Jeffrey.

Sa*yette" (?), n. [F. Cf. Say a kind of serge.] A mixed stuff, called
also sagathy. See Sagathy.

Say"ing (?), n. That which is said; a declaration; a statement,
especially a proverbial one; an aphorism; a proverb.

    Many are the sayings of the wise, In ancient and in modern books
    enrolled.


Milton.

Syn. -- Declaration; speech; adage; maxim; aphorism; apothegm; saw;
proverb; byword.

Say"man (?), n. [Say sample + man.] One who assays. [Obs.] Bacon.

Say"mas`ter (?), n. A master of assay; one who tries or proves. [Obs.]
"Great saymaster of state." B. Jonson.

Saynd (?), obs. p. p. of Senge, to singe. Chaucer.

'Sblood (?), interj. An abbreviation of God's blood; -- used as an
oath. [Obs.] Shak.

Scab (skb), n. [OE. scab, scabbe, shabbe; cf. AS. scæb, sceabb, scebb,
Dan. & Sw. skab, and also L. scabies, fr. scabere to scratch, akin to
E. shave. See Shave, and cf. Shab, Shabby.] 1. An incrustation over a
sore, wound, vesicle, or pustule, formed by the drying up of the
discharge from the diseased part.

2. The itch in man; also, the scurvy. [Colloq. or Obs.]

3. The mange, esp. when it appears on sheep. Chaucer.

4. A disease of potatoes producing pits in their surface, caused by a
minute fungus (Tiburcinia Scabies).

5. (Founding) A slight irregular protuberance which defaces the surface
of a casting, caused by the breaking away of a part of the mold.

6. A mean, dirty, paltry fellow. [Low] Shak.

7. A nickname for a workman who engages for lower wages than are fixed
by the trades unions; also, for one who takes the place of a workman on
a strike. [Cant]

Scab, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scabbed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scabbing.] To
become covered with a scab; as, the wound scabbed over.

Scab"bard (?), n. [OE. scaubert, scauberk, OF. escaubers, escauberz,
pl., scabbards, probably of German or Scan. origin; cf. Icel. sklpr
scabbard, and G. bergen to conceal. Cf. Hauberk.] The case in which the
blade of a sword, dagger, etc., is kept; a sheath.

    Nor in thy scabbard sheathe that famous blade.


Fairfax.

Scabbard fish (Zoöl.), a long, compressed, silver-colored tænioid fish
(Lepidopus caudatus, or argyreus), found on the European coasts, and
more abundantly about New Zealand, where it is called frostfish and
considered an excellent food fish.

Scab"bard (?), v. t. To put in a scabbard.

Scab"bard plane` (?). See Scaleboard plane, under Scaleboard.

Scab"bed (? or ?), a. 1. Abounding with scabs; diseased with scabs.

2. Fig.: Mean; paltry; vile; worthless. Bacon.

Scab"bed*ness (?), n. Scabbiness.

Scab"bi*ly (?), adv. In a scabby manner.

Scab"bi*ness, n. The quality or state of being scabby.

Scab"ble (?), v. t. See Scapple.

Scab"by (?), a. [Compar. Scabbier (&?;); superl. Scabbiest.] 1.
Affected with scabs; full of scabs.

2. Diseased with the scab, or mange; mangy. Swift.

||Sca"bi*es (?), n. (Med.) The itch.

Sca"bi*ous (?), a. [L. scabiosus, from scabies the scab: cf. F.
scabieux.] Consisting of scabs; rough; itchy; leprous; as, scabious
eruptions. Arbuthnot.

Sca"bi*ous, n. [Cf. F. scabieuse. See Scabious, a.] (Bot.) Any plant of
the genus Scabiosa, several of the species of which are common in
Europe. They resemble the Compositæ, and have similar heads of flowers,
but the anthers are not connected.

Sweet scabious. (a) Mourning bride. (b) A daisylike plant (Erigeron
annuus) having a stout branching stem.

Scab"ling (?), n. [See Scapple.] A fragment or chip of stone. [Written
also scabline.]

Sca*bred"i*ty (?), n. [L. scabredo, fr. scaber rough.] Roughness;
ruggedness. [Obs.] Burton.

Sca"brous (?), a. [L. scabrosus, fr. scaber rough: cf. F. scabreux.] 1.
Rough to the touch, like a file; having small raised dots, scales, or
points; scabby; scurfy; scaly. Arbuthnot.

2. Fig.: Harsh; unmusical. [R.]

    His verse is scabrous and hobbling.


Dryden.

Sca"brous*ness, n. The quality of being scabrous.

Scab"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) Elecampane.

Scad (?), n. [Gael. & Ir. sgadan a herring.] (Zoöl.) (a) A small
carangoid fish (Trachurus saurus) abundant on the European coast, and
less common on the American. The name is applied also to several allied
species. (b) The goggler; -- called also big-eyed scad. See Goggler.
(c) The friar skate. [Scot.] (d) The cigar fish, or round robin.

Scaf"fold (?), n. [OF. eschafault, eschafaut, escafaut, escadafaut, F.
échafaud; probably originally the same word as E. & F. catafalque, It.
catafalco. See Catafalque.] 1. A temporary structure of timber, boards,
etc., for various purposes, as for supporting workmen and materials in
building, for exhibiting a spectacle upon, for holding the spectators
at a show, etc.

    Pardon, gentles all, The flat, unraised spirits that have dared On
    this unworthy scaffold to bring forth So great an object.


Shak.

2. Specifically, a stage or elevated platform for the execution of a
criminal; as, to die on the scaffold.

    That a scaffold of execution should grow a scaffold of coronation.


Sir P. Sidney.

3. (Metal.) An accumulation of adherent, partly fused material forming
a shelf, or dome-shaped obstruction, above the tuyères in a blast
furnace.

Scaf"fold, v. t. To furnish or uphold with a scaffold.

Scaf"fold*age (?), n. A scaffold. [R.] Shak.

Scaf"fold*ing, n. 1. A scaffold; a supporting framework; as, the
scaffolding of the body. Pope.

2. Materials for building scaffolds.

Scagl"ia (?), n. [It. scaglia a scale, a shell, a chip of marble.] A
reddish variety of limestone.

Scagl*io"la (?), n. [It. scagliuola, dim. of scaglia. See Scaglia.] An
imitation of any veined and ornamental stone, as marble, formed by a
substratum of finely ground gypsum mixed with glue, the surface of
which, while soft, is variegated with splinters of marble, spar,
granite, etc., and subsequently colored and polished.

||Sca"la (?), n.; pl. Scalæ (#). [L., a ladder.] 1. (Surg.) A machine
||formerly employed for reducing dislocations of the humerus.

2. (Anat.) A term applied to any one of the three canals of the
cochlea.

Scal"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being scaled.

{ Sca*lade" (?), Sca*la"do (?) }, n. (Mil.) See Escalade. Fairfax.

Sca"lar (?), n. (Math.) In the quaternion analysis, a quantity that has
magnitude, but not direction; -- distinguished from a vector, which has
both magnitude and direction.

||Sca*la"ri*a (?), n. [L., flight of steps.] (Zoöl.) Any one of
||numerous species of marine gastropods of the genus Scalaria, or
||family Scalaridæ, having elongated spiral turreted shells, with
||rounded whorls, usually crossed by ribs or varices. The color is
||generally white or pale. Called also ladder shell, and wentletrap.
||See Ptenoglossa, and Wentletrap.

Sca*lar"i*form (?), a. [L. scalare, scalaria, staircase, ladder +
-form: cf. F. scalariforme.] 1. Resembling a ladder in form or
appearance; having transverse bars or markings like the rounds of a
ladder; as, the scalariform cells and scalariform pits in some plants.

2. (Zoöl.) Like or pertaining to a scalaria.

Sca"la*ry (?), a. [L. scalaris, fr. scalae, pl. scala, staircase,
ladder.] Resembling a ladder; formed with steps. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Scal"a*wag (?), n. A scamp; a scapegrace. [Spelt also scallawag.]
[Slang, U.S.] Bartlett.

Scald (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scalded; p. pr. & vb. n. Scalding.] [OF.
eschalder, eschauder, escauder, F. échauder, fr. L. excaldare; ex +
caldus, calidus, warm, hot. See Ex, and Caldron.] 1. To burn with hot
liquid or steam; to pain or injure by contact with, or immersion in,
any hot fluid; as, to scald the hand.

    Mine own tears Do scald like molten lead.


Shak.

    Here the blue flames of scalding brimstone fall.


Cowley.

2. To expose to a boiling or violent heat over a fire, or in hot water
or other liquor; as, to scald milk or meat.

Scald, n. A burn, or injury to the skin or flesh, by some hot liquid,
or by steam.

Scald, a. [For scalled. See Scall.] 1. Affected with the scab; scabby.
Shak.

2. Scurvy; paltry; as, scald rhymers. [Obs.] Shak.

Scald crow (Zoöl.), the hooded crow. [Ireland] -- Scald head (Med.), a
name popularly given to several diseases of the scalp characterized by
pustules (the dried discharge of which forms scales) and by falling out
of the hair.

Scald, n. Scurf on the head. See Scall. Spenser.

Scald (skld or skld; 277), n. [Icel. skld.] One of the ancient
Scandinavian poets and historiographers; a reciter and singer of heroic
poems, eulogies, etc., among the Norsemen; more rarely, a bard of any
of the ancient Teutonic tribes. [Written also skald.]

    A war song such as was of yore chanted on the field of battle by
    the scalds of the yet heathen Saxons.


Sir W. Scott.

Scald"er (?), n. A Scandinavian poet; a scald.

Scald"fish` (?), n. [Scald, a. + fish.] (Zoöl.) A European flounder
(Arnoglossus laterna, or Psetta arnoglossa); -- called also megrim, and
smooth sole.

Scald"ic (? or ?), a. Of or pertaining to the scalds of the Norsemen;
as, scaldic poetry.

Scale (skl), n. [AS. scle; perhaps influenced by the kindred Icel. skl
balance, dish, akin also to D. schaal a scale, bowl, shell, G. schale,
OHG. scla, Dan. skaal drinking cup, bowl, dish, and perh. to E. scale
of a fish. Cf. Scale of a fish, Skull the brain case.] 1. The dish of a
balance; hence, the balance itself; an instrument or machine for
weighing; as, to turn the scale; -- chiefly used in the plural when
applied to the whole instrument or apparatus for weighing. Also used
figuratively.

    Long time in even scale The battle hung.


Milton.

    The scales are turned; her kindness weighs no more Now than my
    vows.


Waller.

2. pl. (Astron.) The sign or constellation Libra.

Platform scale. See under Platform.

Scale, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scaled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scaling.] To
weigh or measure according to a scale; to measure; also, to grade or
vary according to a scale or system.

    Scaling his present bearing with his past.


Shak.

To scale, or scale down, a debt, wages, etc., to reduce a debt, etc.,
according to a fixed ratio or scale. [U.S.]

Scale, n. [Cf. AS. scealu, scalu, a shell, parings; akin to D. schaal,
G. schale, OHG. scala, Dan. & Sw. skal a shell, Dan. skiæl a fish
scale, Goth. skalja tile, and E. shale, shell, and perhaps also to
scale of a balance; but perhaps rather fr. OF. escale, escaile, F.
écaille scale of a fish, and écale shell of beans, pease, eggs, nuts,
of German origin, and akin to Goth. skalja, G. schale. See Shale.] 1.
(Anat.) One of the small, thin, membranous, bony or horny pieces which
form the covering of many fishes and reptiles, and some mammals,
belonging to the dermal part of the skeleton, or dermoskeleton. See
Cycloid, Ctenoid, and Ganoid.

    Fish that, with their fins and shining scales, Glide under the
    green wave.


Milton.

2. Hence, any layer or leaf of metal or other material, resembling in
size and thinness the scale of a fish; as, a scale of iron, of bone,
etc.

3. (Zoöl.) One of the small scalelike structures covering parts of some
invertebrates, as those on the wings of Lepidoptera and on the body of
Thysanura; the elytra of certain annelids. See Lepidoptera.

4. (Zoöl.) A scale insect. (See below.)

5. (Bot.) A small appendage like a rudimentary leaf, resembling the
scales of a fish in form, and often in arrangement; as, the scale of a
bud, of a pine cone, and the like. The name is also given to the chaff
on the stems of ferns.

6. The thin metallic side plate of the handle of a pocketknife. See
Illust. of Pocketknife.

7. An incrustation deposit on the inside of a vessel in which water is
heated, as a steam boiler.

8. (Metal.) The thin oxide which forms on the surface of iron forgings.
It consists essentially of the magnetic oxide, Fe3O4. Also, a similar
coating upon other metals.

Covering scale (Zoöl.), a hydrophyllium. -- Ganoid scale. (Zoöl.) See
under Ganoid. -- Scale armor (Mil.), armor made of small metallic
scales overlapping, and fastened upon leather or cloth. -- Scale beetle
(Zoöl.), the tiger beetle. -- Scale carp (Zoöl.), a carp having normal
scales. -- Scale insect (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of small
hemipterous insects belonging to the family Coccidæ, in which the
females, when adult, become more or less scalelike in form. They are
found upon the leaves and twigs of various trees and shrubs, and often
do great damage to fruit trees. See Orange scale,under Orange. -- Scale
moss (Bot.), any leafy-stemmed moss of the order Hepaticæ; -- so called
from the small imbricated scalelike leaves of most of the species. See
Hepatica, 2, and Jungermannia.

Scale (?), v. t. 1. To strip or clear of scale or scales; as, to scale
a fish; to scale the inside of a boiler.

2. To take off in thin layers or scales, as tartar from the teeth; to
pare off, as a surface. "If all the mountains were scaled, and the
earth made even." T. Burnet.

3. To scatter; to spread. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

4. (Gun.) To clean, as the inside of a cannon, by the explosion of a
small quantity of powder. Totten.

Scale, v. i. 1. To separate and come off in thin layers or laminæ; as,
some sandstone scales by exposure.

    Those that cast their shell are the lobster and crab; the old skins
    are found, but the old shells never; so it is likely that they
    scale off.


Bacon.

2. To separate; to scatter. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

Scale, n. [L. scalae, pl., scala staircase, ladder; akin to scandere to
climb. See Scan; cf. Escalade.] 1. A ladder; a series of steps; a means
of ascending. [Obs.]

2. Hence, anything graduated, especially when employed as a measure or
rule, or marked by lines at regular intervals. Specifically: (a) A
mathematical instrument, consisting of a slip of wood, ivory, or metal,
with one or more sets of spaces graduated and numbered on its surface,
for measuring or laying off distances, etc., as in drawing, plotting,
and the like. See Gunter's scale. (b) A series of spaces marked by
lines, and representing proportionately larger distances; as, a scale
of miles, yards, feet, etc., for a map or plan. (c) A basis for a
numeral system; as, the decimal scale; the binary scale, etc. (d)
(Mus.) The graduated series of all the tones, ascending or descending,
from the keynote to its octave; -- called also the gamut. It may be
repeated through any number of octaves. See Chromatic scale, Diatonic
scale, Major scale, and Minor scale, under Chromatic, Diatonic, Major,
and Minor.

3. Gradation; succession of ascending and descending steps and degrees;
progressive series; scheme of comparative rank or order; as, a scale of
being.

    There is a certain scale of duties . . . which for want of studying
    in right order, all the world is in confusion.


Milton.

4. Relative dimensions, without difference in proportion of parts; size
or degree of the parts or components in any complex thing, compared
with other like things; especially, the relative proportion of the
linear dimensions of the parts of a drawing, map, model, etc., to the
dimensions of the corresponding parts of the object that is
represented; as, a map on a scale of an inch to a mile.

Scale of chords, a graduated scale on which are given the lengths of
the chords of arcs from 0° to 90° in a circle of given radius, -- used
in measuring given angles and in plotting angles of given numbers of
degrees.

Scale, v. t. [Cf. It. scalare, fr. L. scalae, scala. See Scale a
ladder.] To climb by a ladder, or as if by a ladder; to ascend by steps
or by climbing; to clamber up; as, to scale the wall of a fort.

    Oft have I scaled the craggy oak.


Spenser.

Scale, v. i. To lead up by steps; to ascend. [Obs.]

    Satan from hence, now on the lower stair, That scaled by steps of
    gold to heaven-gate, Looks down with wonder.


Milton.

Scale"back` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of marine
annelids of the family Polynoidæ, and allies, which have two rows of
scales, or elytra, along the back. See Illust. under Chætopoda.

Scale"beam` (?), n. 1. The lever or beam of a balance; the lever of a
platform scale, to which the poise for weighing is applied.

2. A weighing apparatus with a sliding weight, resembling a steelyard.

Scale"board` (?; commonly &?;), n. [3d scale + board.] 1. (Print.) A
thin slip of wood used to justify a page. [Obs.] Crabb.

2. A thin veneer of leaf of wood used for covering the surface of
articles of furniture, and the like.

Scaleboard plane, a plane for cutting from a board a wide shaving
forming a scaleboard.

Scaled (?), a. 1. Covered with scales, or scalelike structures; -- said
of a fish, a reptile, a moth, etc.

2. Without scales, or with the scales removed; as, scaled herring.

3. (Zoöl.) Having feathers which in form, color, or arrangement
somewhat resemble scales; as, the scaled dove.

Scaled dove (Zoöl.), any American dove of the genus Scardafella. Its
colored feather tips resemble scales.

Scale"less (?), a. Destitute of scales.

Sca*lene" (?), a. [L. scalenus, Gr. &?;: cf. F. scalène.] 1. (Geom.)
(a) Having the sides and angles unequal; -- said of a triangle. (b)
Having the axis inclined to the base, as a cone.

2. (Anat.) (a) Designating several triangular muscles called scalene
muscles. (b) Of or pertaining to the scalene muscles.

Scalene muscles (Anat.), a group of muscles, usually three on each side
in man, extending from the cervical vertebræ to the first and second
ribs.

Sca*lene", n. (Geom.) A triangle having its sides and angles unequal.

Sca*le`no*he"dral (sk*l`n*h"dral), a. (Crystallog.) Of or pertaining to
a scalenohedron.

Sca*le`no*he"dron (-drn), n. [Gr. skalhno`s uneven + "e`dra seat,
base.] (Crystallog.) A pyramidal form under the rhombohedral system,
inclosed by twelve faces, each a scalene triangle.

Scal"er (?), n. One who, or that which, scales; specifically, a
dentist's instrument for removing tartar from the teeth.

Scale"-winged` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the wings covered with small
scalelike structures, as the Lepidoptera; scaly-winged.

Scal"i*ness (?), n. The state of being scaly; roughness.

Scal"ing (skl"ng), a. 1. Adapted for removing scales, as from a fish;
as, a scaling knife; adapted for removing scale, as from the interior
of a steam boiler; as, a scaling hammer, bar, etc.

2. Serving as an aid in clambering; as, a scaling ladder, used in
assaulting a fortified place.

Scal*io"la (?), n. Same as Scagliola.

Scall (?), n. [Icel. skalli a bald head. Cf. Scald, a.] A scurf or
scabby disease, especially of the scalp.

    It is a dry scall, even a leprosy upon the head.


Lev. xiii. 30.

Scall, a. Scabby; scurfy. [Obs.] Shak.

Scalled (?), a. Scabby; scurfy; scall. [Obs.] "With scalled brows
black." Chaucer.

Scalled head. (Med.) See Scald head, under Scald, a.

Scal"lion (?), n. [OF. escalone, eschaloingne, L. caepa Ascalonia onion
of Ascalon; caepa onion + Ascalonius of Ascalon, fr. Ascalo Ascalon, a
town in Palestine. Cf. Shallot.] 1. (Bot.) A kind of small onion
(Allium Ascalonicum), native of Palestine; the eschalot, or shallot.

2. Any onion which does not "bottom out," but remains with a thick stem
like a leek. Amer. Cyc.

Scal"lop (?; 277), n. [OF. escalope a shell, probably of German or
Dutch origin, and akin to E. scale of a fish; cf. D. schelp shell. See
Scale of a fish, and cf. Escalop.] [Written also scollop.] 1. (Zoöl.)
Any one of numerous species of marine bivalve mollusks of the genus
Pecten and allied genera of the family Pectinidæ. The shell is usually
radially ribbed, and the edge is therefore often undulated in a
characteristic manner. The large adductor muscle of some the species is
much used as food. One species (Vola Jacobæus) occurs on the coast of
Palestine, and its shell was formerly worn by pilgrims as a mark that
they had been to the Holy Land. Called also fan shell. See Pecten, 2.

The common edible scallop of the Eastern United States is Pecten
irradians; the large sea scallop, also used as food, is P. Clintonius,
or tenuicostatus.

2. One of series of segments of circles joined at their extremities,
forming a border like the edge or surface of a scallop shell.

3. One of the shells of a scallop; also, a dish resembling a scallop
shell.

Scal"lop, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scalloped (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scalloping.] 1. To mark or cut the edge or border of into segments of
circles, like the edge or surface of a scallop shell. See Scallop, n.,
2.

2. (Cookery) To bake in scallop shells or dishes; to prepare with
crumbs of bread or cracker, and bake. See Scalloped oysters, below.

Scal"loped (?), a. 1. Furnished with a scallop; made or done with or in
a scallop.

2. Having the edge or border cut or marked with segments of circles.
See Scallop, n., 2.

3. (Cookery) Baked in a scallop; cooked with crumbs.

Scalloped oysters (Cookery), opened oysters baked in a deep dish with
alternate layers of bread or cracker crumbs, seasoned with pepper,
nutmeg, and butter. This was at first done in scallop shells.

Scal"lop*er (?), n. One who fishes for scallops.

Scal"lop*ing, n. Fishing for scallops.

Scalp (sklp), n. [Cf. Scallop.] A bed of oysters or mussels. [Scot.]

Scalp, n. [Perhaps akin to D. schelp shell. Cf. Scallop.] 1. That part
of the integument of the head which is usually covered with hair.

    By the bare scalp of Robin Hodd's fat friar, This fellow were a
    king for our wild faction!


Shak.

2. A part of the skin of the head, with the hair attached, cut or torn
off from an enemy by the Indian warriors of North America, as a token
of victory.

3. Fig.: The top; the summit. Macaulay.

Scalp lock, a long tuft of hair left on the crown of the head by the
warriors of some tribes of American Indians.

Scalp, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scalped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scalping.] 1.
To deprive of the scalp; to cut or tear the scalp from the head of.

2. (Surg.) To remove the skin of.

    We must scalp the whole lid [of the eye].


J. S. Wells.

3. (Milling) To brush the hairs or fuzz from, as wheat grains, in the
process of high milling. Knight.

Scalp, v. i. To make a small, quick profit by slight fluctuations of
the market; -- said of brokers who operate in this way on their own
account. [Cant]

Scal"pel (skl"pl), n. [L. scalpellum, dim. of scalprum a knife, akin to
scalpere to cut, carve, scrape: cf. F. scalpel.] (Surg.) A small knife
with a thin, keen blade, -- used by surgeons, and in dissecting.

Scalper (sklp"r), n. 1. One who, or that which, scalps.

2. (Surg.) Same as Scalping iron, under Scalping.

3. A broker who, dealing on his own account, tries to get a small and
quick profit from slight fluctuations of the market. [Cant]

4. A person who buys and sells the unused parts of railroad tickets.
[Cant]

Scalp"ing (sklp"ng), a. & n. from Scalp.

Scalping iron (Surg.), an instrument used in scraping foul and carious
bones; a raspatory. -- Scalping knife, a knife used by North American
Indians in scalping.

Scal"pri*form (?), a. [L. scalprum chisel, knife + -form.] (Anat.)
Shaped like a chisel; as, the scalpriform incisors of rodents.

Scal"y (?), a. 1. Covered or abounding with scales; as, a scaly fish.
"Scaly crocodile." Milton.

2. Resembling scales, laminæ, or layers.

3. Mean; low; as, a scaly fellow. [Low]

4. (Bot.) Composed of scales lying over each other; as, a scaly bulb;
covered with scales; as, a scaly stem.

Scaly ant-eater (Zoöl.), the pangolin.

Scal"y-winged` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Scale-winged.

Scam"ble (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scambled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scambling.] [Cf. OD. schampelen to deviate, to slip, schampen to go
away, escape, slip, and E. scamper, shamble.] 1. To move awkwardly; to
be shuffling, irregular, or unsteady; to sprawl; to shamble. "Some
scambling shifts." Dr. H. More. "A fine old hall, but a scambling
house." Evelyn.

2. To move about pushing and jostling; to be rude and turbulent; to
scramble. "The scambling and unquiet time did push it out of . . .
question." Shak.

Scam"ble, v. t. To mangle. [Obs.] Mortimer.

Scam"bler (?), n. 1. One who scambles.

2. A bold intruder upon the hospitality of others; a mealtime visitor.
[Scot.]

Scam"bling*ly (?), adv. In a scambling manner; with turbulence and
noise; with bold intrusiveness.

{ Scam"ell (?), or Scam"mel }, n. (Zoöl.) The female bar-tailed godwit.
[Prov. Eng.]

Whether this is the scamel mentioned by Shakespeare ["Tempest," ii. 2]
is not known.

||Sca*mil"lus (?), n.; pl. Scamilli (#). [L., originally, a little
||bench, dim. of scamnum bench, stool.] (Arch.) A sort of second plinth
||or block, below the bases of Ionic and Corinthian columns, generally
||without moldings, and of smaller size horizontally than the pedestal.

Scam*mo"ni*ate (?), a. Made from scammony; as, a scammoniate aperient.

Scam"mo*ny (skm"m*n), n. [F. scammonée, L. scammonia, scammonea, Gr.
skammwni`a.] 1. (Bot.) A species of bindweed or Convolvulus (C.
Scammonia).

2. An inspissated sap obtained from the root of the Convolvulus
Scammonia, of a blackish gray color, a nauseous smell like that of old
cheese, and a somewhat acrid taste. It is used in medicine as a
cathartic.

Scamp (skmp), n. [OF. escamper to run away, to make one's escape.
Originally, one who runs away, a fugitive, a vagabond. See Scamper.] A
rascal; a swindler; a rogue. De Quincey.

Scamp, v. t. [Cf. Scamp,n., or Scant, a., and Skimp.] To perform in a
hasty, neglectful, or imperfect manner; to do superficially. [Colloq.]

    A workman is said to scamp his work when he does it in a
    superficial, dishonest manner.


Wedgwood.

    Much of the scamping and dawdling complained of is that of men in
    establishments of good repute.


T. Hughes.

||Scam`pa*vi"a (?), n. [It.] A long, low war galley used by the
||Neapolitans and Sicilians in the early part of the nineteenth
||century.

Scam"per (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scampered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scampering.] [OF. escamper to escape, to save one's self; L. ex from +
campus the field (sc. of battle). See Camp, and cf. Decamp, Scamp, n.,
Shamble, v. t.] To run with speed; to run or move in a quick, hurried
manner; to hasten away. Macaulay.

    The lady, however, . . . could not help scampering about the room
    after a mouse.


S. Sharpe.

Scam"per, n. A scampering; a hasty flight.

Scam"per*er (?), n. One who scampers. Tyndell.

Scamp"ish (?), a. Of or like a scamp; knavish; as, scampish conduct.

Scan (skn), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scanned (sknd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scanning.] [L. scandere, scansum, to climb, to scan, akin to Skr. skand
to spring, leap: cf. F. scander. Cf. Ascend, Descend, Scale a ladder.]
1. To mount by steps; to go through with step by step. [Obs.]

    Nor stayed till she the highest stage had scand.


Spenser.

2. Specifically (Pros.), to go through with, as a verse, marking and
distinguishing the feet of which it is composed; to show, in reading,
the metrical structure of; to recite metrically.

3. To go over and examine point by point; to examine with care; to look
closely at or into; to scrutinize.

    The actions of men in high stations are all conspicuous, and liable
    to be scanned and sifted.


Atterbury.

Scan"dal (?), n. [F. scandale, fr. L. scandalum, Gr. &?;, a snare laid
for an enemy, a stumbling block, offense, scandal: cf. OE. scandle, OF.
escandle. See Slander.] 1. Offense caused or experienced; reproach or
reprobation called forth by what is regarded as wrong, criminal,
heinous, or flagrant: opprobrium or disgrace.

    O, what a scandal is it to our crown, That two such noble peers as
    ye should jar!


Shak.

    [I] have brought scandal To Israel, diffidence of God, and doubt In
    feeble hearts.


Milton.

2. Reproachful aspersion; opprobrious censure; defamatory talk, uttered
heedlessly or maliciously.

    You must not put another scandal on him.


Shak.

    My known virtue is from scandal free.


Dryden.

3. (Equity) Anything alleged in pleading which is impertinent, and is
reproachful to any person, or which derogates from the dignity of the
court, or is contrary to good manners. Daniell.

Syn. -- Defamation; detraction; slander; calumny; opprobrium; reproach;
shame; disgrace.

Scan"dal (?), v. t. 1. To treat opprobriously; to defame; to asperse;
to traduce; to slander. [R.]

    I do fawn on men and hug them hard And after scandal them.


Shak.

2. To scandalize; to offend. [Obs.] Bp. Story.

Syn. -- To defame; traduce; reproach; slander; calumniate; asperse;
vilify; disgrace.

Scan"dal*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scandalized (&?;); p. pr. & vb.
n. Scandalizing (&?;).] [F. scandaliser, L. scandalizare, from Gr.
skandali`zein.] 1. To offend the feelings or the conscience of (a
person) by some action which is considered immoral or criminal; to
bring shame, disgrace, or reproach upon.

    I demand who they are whom we scandalize by using harmless things.


Hooker.

    The congregation looked on in silence, the better class
    scandalized, and the lower orders, some laughing, others backing
    the soldier or the minister, as their fancy dictated.


Sir W. Scott.

2. To reproach; to libel; to defame; to slander.

    To tell his tale might be interpreted into scandalizing the order.


Sir W. Scott.

Scan"dal*ous (?), a. [Cf. F. scandaleux.] 1. Giving offense to the
conscience or moral feelings; exciting reprobation; calling out
condemnation.

    Nothing scandalous or offensive unto any.


Hooker.

2. Disgraceful to reputation; bringing shame or infamy; opprobrious;
as, a scandalous crime or vice.

3. Defamatory; libelous; as, a scandalous story.

Scan"dal*ous*ly, adv. 1. In a manner to give offense; shamefully.

    His discourse at table was scandalously unbecoming the dignity of
    his station.


Swift.

2. With a disposition to impute immorality or wrong.

    Shun their fault, who, scandalously nice, Will needs mistake an
    author into vice.


Pope.

Scan"dal*ous*ness, n. Quality of being scandalous.

||Scan"da*lum mag*na"tum` (?). [L., scandal of magnates.] (Law) A
||defamatory speech or writing published to the injury of a person of
||dignity; -- usually abbreviated scan. mag.

Scan"dent (?), a. [L. scandens, -entis, p. pr. of scandere to climb.]
Climbing.

Scandent plants may climb either by twining, as the hop, or by twisted
leafstalks, as the clematis, or by tendrils, as the passion flower, or
by rootlets, as the ivy.

Scan"di*a (?), n. [NL. See Scandium.] (Chem.) A chemical earth, the
oxide of scandium.

Scan"dic (?), a. (Chem.) Of or pertaining to scandium; derived from, or
containing, scandium.

Scan`di*na"vi*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Scandinavia, that is,
Sweden, Norway, and Denmark. -- n. A native or inhabitant of
Scandinavia.

Scan"di*um (?), n. [NL. So called because found in Scandinavian
minerals.] (Chem.) A rare metallic element of the boron group, whose
existence was predicted under the provisional name ekaboron by means of
the periodic law, and subsequently discovered by spectrum analysis in
certain rare Scandinavian minerals (euxenite and gadolinite). It has
not yet been isolated. Symbol Sc. Atomic weight 44.

Scan"sion (?), n. [L. scansio, fr. scandere, scansum, to climb. See
Scan.] (Pros.) The act of scanning; distinguishing the metrical feet of
a verse by emphasis, pauses, or otherwise.

||Scan*so"res (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. L. scandere, scansum, to climb.]
||(Zoöl.) An artifical group of birds formerly regarded as an order.
||They are distributed among several orders by modern ornithologists.

The toes are in pairs, two before and two behind, by which they are
enabled to cling to, and climb upon, trees, as the woodpeckers,
parrots, cuckoos, and trogons. See Illust. under Aves.

Scan*so"ri*al (?), a. (Zoöl.) (a) Capable of climbing; as, the
woodpecker is a scansorial bird; adapted for climbing; as, a scansorial
foot. (b) Of or pertaining to the Scansores. See Illust.. under Aves.

Scansorial tail (Zoöl.), a tail in which the feathers are stiff and
sharp at the tip, as in the woodpeckers.

Scant (?), a. [Compar. Scanter (?); superl. Scantest.] [Icel. skamt,
neuter of skamr, skammr, short; cf. skamta to dole out, to portion.] 1.
Not full, large, or plentiful; scarcely sufficient; less than is wanted
for the purpose; scanty; meager; not enough; as, a scant allowance of
provisions or water; a scant pattern of cloth for a garment.

    His sermon was scant, in all, a quarter of an hour.


Ridley.

2. Sparing; parsimonious; chary.

    Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence.


Shak.

Syn. -- See under Scanty.

Scant, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scanted; p. pr. & vb. n. Scanting.] 1. To
limit; to straiten; to treat illiberally; to stint; as, to scant one in
provisions; to scant ourselves in the use of necessaries.

    Where a man hath a great living laid together and where he is
    scanted.


Bacon.

    I am scanted in the pleasure of dwelling on your actions.


Dryden.

2. To cut short; to make small, narrow, or scanty; to curtail. "Scant
not my cups." Shak.

Scant, v. i. To fail, or become less; to scantle; as, the wind scants.

Scant, adv. In a scant manner; with difficulty; scarcely; hardly.
[Obs.] Bacon.

    So weak that he was scant able to go down the stairs.


Fuller.

Scant, n. Scantness; scarcity. [R.] T. Carew.

Scant"i*ly (?), adv. In a scanty manner; not fully; not plentifully;
sparingly; parsimoniously.

    His mind was very scantily stored with materials.


Macaulay.

Scant"i*ness, n. Quality or condition of being scanty.

Scan"tle (?), v. i. [Dim. of scant, v.] To be deficient; to fail.
[Obs.] Drayton.

Scan"tle (?), v. t. [OF. escanteler, eschanteler, to break into
contles; pref. es- (L. ex) + cantel, chantel, corner, side, piece.
Confused with E. scant. See Cantle.] To scant; to be niggard of; to
divide into small pieces; to cut short or down. [Obs.]

    All their pay Must your discretion scantle; keep it back.


J. Webster.

Scant"let (?), n. [OF. eschantelet corner.] A small pattern; a small
quantity. [Obs.] Sir M. Hale.

Scant"ling (?), a. [See Scant, a.] Not plentiful; small; scanty. [Obs.]
Jer. Taylor.

Scant"ling, n. [Cf. OF. eschantillon, F. échantillon, a sample,
pattern, example. In some senses confused with scant insufficient. See
Scantle, v. t.] 1. A fragment; a bit; a little piece. Specifically: (a)
A piece or quantity cut for a special purpose; a sample. [Obs.]

    Such as exceed not this scantling; -- to be solace to the sovereign
    and harmless to the people.


Bacon.

    A pretty scantling of his knowledge may taken by his deferring to
    be baptized so many years.


Milton.

(b) A small quantity; a little bit; not much. [Obs.]

    Reducing them to narrow scantlings.


Jer. Taylor.

2. A piece of timber sawed or cut of a small size, as for studs, rails,
etc.

3. The dimensions of a piece of timber with regard to its breadth and
thickness; hence, the measure or dimensions of anything.

4. A rough draught; a rude sketch or outline.

5. A frame for casks to lie upon; a trestle. Knight.

Scant"ly, adv. 1. In a scant manner; not fully or sufficiently;
narrowly; penuriously. Dryden.

2. Scarcely; hardly; barely.

    Scantly they durst their feeble eyes dispread Upon that town.


Fairfax.

    We hold a tourney here to-morrow morn, And there is scantly time
    for half the work.


Tennyson.

Scant"ness, n. The quality or condition of being scant; narrowness;
smallness; insufficiency; scantiness. "Scantness of outward things."
Barrow.

Scant"y (?), a. [Compar. Scantier (?); superl. Scantiest.] [From Scant,
a.] 1. Wanting amplitude or extent; narrow; small; not abundant.

    His dominions were very narrow and scanty.


Locke.

    Now scantier limits the proud arch confine.


Pope.

2. Somewhat less than is needed; insufficient; scant; as, a scanty
supply of words; a scanty supply of bread.

3. Sparing; niggardly; parsimonious.

    In illustrating a point of difficulty, be not too scanty of words.


I. Watts.

Syn. -- Scant; narrow; small; poor; deficient; meager; scarce; chary;
sparing; parsimonious; penurious; niggardly; grudging.

Scape (?), n. [L. scapus shaft, stem, stalk; cf. Gr. &?; a staff: cf.
F. scape. Cf. Scepter.] 1. (Bot.) A peduncle rising from the ground or
from a subterranean stem, as in the stemless violets, the bloodroot,
and the like.

2. (Zoöl.) The long basal joint of the antennæ of an insect.

3. (Arch.) (a) The shaft of a column. (b) The apophyge of a shaft.

Scape, v. t. & i. [imp. & p. p. Scaped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scaping.]
[Aphetic form of escape.] To escape. [Obs. or Poetic.] Milton.

    Out of this prison help that we may scape.


Chaucer.

Scape, n. 1. An escape. [Obs.]

    I spake of most disastrous chances, . . . Of hairbreadth scapes in
    the imminent, deadly breach.


Shak.

2. Means of escape; evasion. [Obs.] Donne.

3. A freak; a slip; a fault; an escapade. [Obs.]

    Not pardoning so much as the scapes of error and ignorance.


Milton.

4. Loose act of vice or lewdness. [Obs.] Shak.

Scape"gal`lows (?), n. One who has narrowly escaped the gallows for his
crimes. [Colloq.] Dickens.

Scape"goat` (?), n. [Scape (for escape) + goat.] 1. (Jewish Antiq.) A
goat upon whose head were symbolically placed the sins of the people,
after which he was suffered to escape into the wilderness. Lev. xvi.
10.

2. Hence, a person or thing that is made to bear blame for others.
Tennyson.

Scape"grace` (?), n. A graceless, unprincipled person; one who is wild
and reckless. Beaconsfield.

Scape"less, a. (Bot.) Destitute of a scape.

Scape"ment (?), n. [See Scape, v., Escapement.] Same as Escapement, 3.

Scape"-wheel` (?), n. (Horol.) The wheel in an escapement (as of a
clock or a watch) into the teeth of which the pallets play.

Sca*phan"der (?), n. [Gr. &?;, &?;, anything hollowed + &?;, &?;, a
man: cf. F. scaphandre.] The case, or impermeable apparel, in which a
diver can work while under water.

Scaph"ism (?), n. [Gr. ska`fh a trough.] An ancient mode of punishing
criminals among the Persians, by confining the victim in a trough, with
his head and limbs smeared with honey or the like, and exposed to the
sun and to insects until he died.

Scaph"ite (?), n. [L. scapha a boat, fr. Gr. ska`fh a boat, anything
dug or scooped out, fr. ska`ptein to dig.] (Paleon.) Any fossil
cephalopod shell of the genus Scaphites, belonging to the Ammonite
family and having a chambered boat-shaped shell. Scaphites are found in
the Cretaceous formation.

Scaph`o*ce*phal"ic (?), a. (Anat.) Of, pertaining to, or affected with,
scaphocephaly.

Scaph`o*ceph"a*ly (?), n. [Gr. ska`fh a boat + kefalh` head.] (Anat.) A
deformed condition of the skull, in which the vault is narrow,
elongated, and more or less boat-shaped.

Scaph`o*ce"rite (?), n. [Gr. ska`fh boat + E. cerite.] (Zoöl.) A
flattened plate or scale attached to the second joint of the antennæ of
many Crustacea.

Sca*phog"na*thite (?), n. [Gr. ska`fh boat + gna`qos jaw.] (Zoöl.) A
thin leafike appendage (the exopodite) of the second maxilla of decapod
crustaceans. It serves as a pumping organ to draw the water through the
gill cavity.

Scaph"oid (?; 277), a. [Gr. ska`fh a boat + -oid: cf. F. scaphoïde.]
(Anat.) Resembling a boat in form; boat-shaped. -- n. The scaphoid
bone.

Scaphoid bone (a) One of the carpal bones, which articulates with the
radius; the radiale. (b) One of the tarsal bones; the navicular bone.
See under Navicular.

Scaph`o*lu"nar (?), a. [Scaphoid + lunar.] (Anat.) Of or pertaining to
the scaphoid and lunar bones of the carpus. -- n. The scapholunar bone.

Scapholunar bone, a bone formed by the coalescence of the scaphoid and
lunar in the carpus of carnivora.

||Sca*phop"o*da (?), n. pl. [NL., from Gr. ska`fh a boat + -poda.]
||(Zoöl.) A class of marine cephalate Mollusca having a tubular shell
||open at both ends, a pointed or spadelike foot for burrowing, and
||many long, slender, prehensile oral tentacles. It includes Dentalium,
||or the tooth shells, and other similar shells. Called also
||Prosopocephala, and Solenoconcha.

Sca"pi*form (?), a. (Bot.) Resembling a scape, or flower stem.

Scap"o*lite (skp"*lt), n. [Gr. &?; a staff, or L. scapus a stem, stalk
+ -lite: cf. F. scapolite.] (Mon.) A grayish white mineral occuring in
tetragonal crystals and in cleavable masses. It is essentially a
silicate of alumina and soda.

The scapolite group includes scapolite proper, or wernerite, also
meionite, dipyre, etc.

Scap"ple (skp"p'l), v. t. [Cf. OF. eskapeler, eschapler, to cut, hew,
LL. scapellare. Cf. Scabble.] (a) To work roughly, or shape without
finishing, as stone before leaving the quarry. (b) To dress in any way
short of fine tooling or rubbing, as stone. Gwilt.

Scap"u*la (skp"*l), n.; pl. L. Scapulæ (#), E. Scapulas (#). [L.] 1.
(Anat.) The principal bone of the shoulder girdle in mammals; the
shoulder blade.

2. (Zoöl.) One of the plates from which the arms of a crinoid arise.

Scap"u*lar (?), a. [Cf. F. scapulaire. Cf. Scapulary.] Of or pertaining
to the scapula or the shoulder.

Scapular arch (Anat.), the pectoral arch. See under pectoral. --
Scapular region, or Scapular tract (Zoöl.), a definite longitudinal
area over the shoulder and along each side of the back of a bird, from
which the scapular feathers arise.

Scap"u*lar, n. (Zoöl.) One of a special group of feathers which arise
from each of the scapular regions and lie along the sides of the back.

{ Scap"u*lar (?), Scap"u*la*ry (?) }, n. [F. scapulaire, LL.
scapularium, scapulare, fr. L. scapula shoulder blade.] 1. (R. C. Ch.)
(a) A loose sleeveless vestment falling in front and behind, worn by
certain religious orders and devout persons. (b) The name given to two
pieces of cloth worn under the ordinary garb and over the shoulders as
an act of devotion. Addis & Arnold.

2. (Surg.) A bandage passing over the shoulder to support it, or to
retain another bandage in place.

Scap"u*la*ry, a. Same as Scapular, a.

Scap"u*la*ry, n. (Zoöl.) Same as 2d and 3d Scapular.

Scap"u*let (?), n. [Dim. of scapula.] (Zoöl.) A secondary mouth fold
developed at the base of each of the armlike lobes of the manubrium of
many rhizostome medusæ. See Illustration in Appendix.

Scap"u*lo- (&?;). A combining form used in anatomy to indicate
connection with, or relation to, the scapula or the shoulder; as, the
scapulo-clavicular articulation, the articulation between the scapula
and clavicle.

||Sca"pus (?), n. [L.] See 1st Scape.

Scar (?), n. [OF. escare, F. eschare an eschar, a dry slough (cf. It. &
Sp. escara), L. eschara, fr. Gr. &?; hearth, fireplace, scab, eschar.
Cf. Eschar.] 1. A mark in the skin or flesh of an animal, made by a
wound or ulcer, and remaining after the wound or ulcer is healed; a
cicatrix; a mark left by a previous injury; a blemish; a disfigurement.

    This earth had the beauty of youth, . . . and not a wrinkle, scar,
    or fracture on all its body.


T. Burnet.

2. (Bot.) A mark left upon a stem or branch by the fall of a leaf,
leaflet, or frond, or upon a seed by the separation of its support. See
Illust.. under Axillary.

Scar, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scarred (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scarring.] To
mark with a scar or scars.

    Yet I'll not shed her blood; Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than
    snow.


Shak.

    His cheeks were deeply scarred.


Macaulay.

Scar, v. i. To form a scar.

Scar, n. [Scot. scar, scaur, Icel. sker a skerry, an isolated rock in
the sea; akin to Dan. skiær, Sw. skär. Cf. Skerry.] An isolated or
protruding rock; a steep, rocky eminence; a bare place on the side of a
mountain or steep bank of earth. [Written also scaur.]

    O sweet and far, from cliff and scar, The horns of Elfland faintly
    blowing.


Tennyson.

Scar, n. [L. scarus, a kind of fish, Gr. ska`ros.] (Zoöl.) A marine
food fish, the scarus, or parrot fish.

{ Scar"ab (?), Scar"a*bee (?) }, n. [L. scarabaeus; cf. F. scarabée.]
(Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of lamellicorn beetles of the genus
Scarabæus, or family Scarabæidæ, especially the sacred, or Egyptian,
species (Scarabæus sacer, and S. Egyptiorum).

||Scar`a*bæ"us (?), n. [L.] (Zoöl.) Same as Scarab.

Scar"a*boid (?), a. [Scarab + -oid.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the
family Scarabæidæ, an extensive group which includes the Egyptian
scarab, the tumbledung, and many similar lamellicorn beetles.

Scar"a*boid, n. (Zoöl.) A scaraboid beetle.

Scar"a*mouch` (?), n. [F. scaramouche, It. scaramuccio, scaramuccia,
originally the name of a celebrated Italian comedian; cf. It.
scaramuccia, scaramuccio, F. escarmouche, skirmish. Cf. Skirmish.] A
personage in the old Italian comedy (derived from Spain) characterized
by great boastfulness and poltroonery; hence, a person of like
characteristics; a buffoon.

Scarce (skârs), a. [Compar. Scarcer (skâr"sr); superl. Scarcest.] [OE.
scars, OF. escars, eschars, LL. scarpsus, excarpsus, for L. excerptus,
p. p. of excerpere to pick out, and hence to contract, to shorten; ex
(see Ex-) + carpere. See Carpet, and cf. Excerp.] 1. Not plentiful or
abundant; in small quantity in proportion to the demand; not easily to
be procured; rare; uncommon.

    You tell him silver is scarcer now in England, and therefore risen
    one fifth in value.


Locke.

    The scarcest of all is a Pescennius Niger on a medallion well
    preserved.


Addison.

2. Scantily supplied (with); deficient (in); - - with of. [Obs.] "A
region scarce of prey." Milton.

3. Sparing; frugal; parsimonious; stingy. [Obs.] "Too scarce ne too
sparing." Chaucer.

To make one's self scarce, to decamp; to depart. [Slang]

Syn. -- Rare; infrequent; deficient. See Rare.

{ Scarce, Scarce"ly }, adv. 1. With difficulty; hardly; scantly;
barely; but just.

    With a scarce well-lighted flame.


Milton.

    The eldest scarcely five year was of age.


Chaucer.

    Slowly she sails, and scarcely stems the tides.


Dryden.

    He had scarcely finished, when the laborer arrived who had been
    sent for my ransom.


W. Irving.

2. Frugally; penuriously. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Scarce"ment (?), n. (Arch. & Engin.) An offset where a wall or bank of
earth, etc., retreats, leaving a shelf or footing.

{ Scarce"ness (?), Scar"ci*ty (?) }, n. The quality or condition of
being scarce; smallness of quantity in proportion to the wants or
demands; deficiency; lack of plenty; short supply; penury; as, a
scarcity of grain; a great scarcity of beauties. Chaucer.

    A scarcity of snow would raise a mutiny at Naples.


Addison.

    Praise . . . owes its value to its scarcity.


Rambler.

    The value of an advantage is enhanced by its scarceness.


Collier.

Syn. -- Deficiency; lack; want; penury; dearth; rareness; rarity;
infrequency.

Scard (?), n. A shard or fragment. [Obs.]

Scare (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scared (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scaring.]
[OE. skerren, skeren, Icel. skirra to bar, prevent, skirrask to shun ,
shrink from; or fr. OE. skerre, adj., scared, Icel. skjarr; both
perhaps akin to E. sheer to turn.] To frighten; to strike with sudden
fear; to alarm.

    The noise of thy crossbow Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is
    lost.


Shak.

To scare away, to drive away by frightening. -- To scare up, to find by
search, as if by beating for game. [Slang]

Syn. -- To alarm; frighten; startle; affright; terrify.

Scare, n. Fright; esp., sudden fright produced by a trifling cause, or
originating in mistake. [Colloq.]

Scare"crow` (?), n. 1. Anything set up to frighten crows or other birds
from cornfields; hence, anything terifying without danger.

    A scarecrow set to frighten fools away.


Dryden.

2. A person clad in rags and tatters.

    No eye hath seen such scarecrows. I'll not march with them through
    Coventry, that's flat.


Shak.

3. (Zoöl.) The black tern. [Prov. Eng.]

Scare"fire` (?), n. 1. An alarm of fire. [Obs.]

2. A fire causing alarm. [Obs.] Fuller.

Scarf (skärf), n. [Icel. skarfr.] A cormorant. [Scot.]

Scarf, n.; pl. Scarfs, rarely Scarves (skärvz). [Cf. OF. escharpe a
pilgrim's scrip, or wallet (hanging about the neck), F. écharpe sash,
scarf; probably from OHG. scharpe pocket; also (from the French) Dan.
skiærf; Sw. skärp, Prov. G. schärfe, LG. scherf, G. schärpe; and also
AS. scearf a fragment; possibly akin to E. scrip a wallet. Cf. Scarp a
scarf.] An article of dress of a light and decorative character, worn
loosely over the shoulders or about the neck or the waist; a light
shawl or handkerchief for the neck; also, a cravat; a neckcloth.

    Put on your hood and scarf.


Swift.

    With care about the banners, scarves, and staves.


R. Browning.

Scarf, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scarfed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scarfing.] 1.
To throw on loosely; to put on like a scarf. "My sea-gown scarfed about
me." Shak.

2. To dress with a scarf, or as with a scarf; to cover with a loose
wrapping. Shak.

Scarf, v. t. [Sw. skarfva to eke out, to join together, skarf a seam,
joint; cf. Dan. skarre to joint, to unite timber, Icel. skara to clinch
the planks of a boat, G. scharben to chop, to cut small.] (a) To form a
scarf on the end or edge of, as for a joint in timber, metal rods, etc.
(b) To unite, as two pieces of timber or metal, by a scarf joint.

Scarf (?), n. (a) In a piece which is to be united to another by a
scarf joint, the part of the end or edge that is tapered off, rabbeted,
or notched so as to be thinner than the rest of the piece. (b) A scarf
joint.

Scarf joint (a) A joint made by overlapping and bolting or locking
together the ends of two pieces of timber that are halved, notched, or
cut away so that they will fit each other and form a lengthened beam of
the same size at the junction as elsewhere. (b) A joint formed by
welding, riveting, or brazing together the overlapping scarfed ends, or
edges, of metal rods, sheets, etc. -- Scarf weld. See under Weld.

Scarf"skin` (?), n. (Anat.) See Epidermis.

Scar`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [L. scarificatio: cf. F. scarification.] The
act of scarifying.

Scar"i*fi*ca`tor (?), n. [Cf. F. scarificateur.] (Surg.) An instrument,
principally used in cupping, containing several lancets moved
simultaneously by a spring, for making slight incisions.

Scar"i*fi`er (?), n. 1. One who scarifies.

2. (Surg.) The instrument used for scarifying.

3. (Agric.) An implement for stripping and loosening the soil, without
bringing up a fresh surface.

    You have your scarifiers to make the ground clean.


Southey.

Scar"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scarified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scarifying (?).] [F. scarifier, L. scarificare, scarifare, fr. Gr. &?;
to scratch up, fr. &?; a pointed instrument.] 1. To scratch or cut the
skin of; esp. (Med.), to make small incisions in, by means of a lancet
or scarificator, so as to draw blood from the smaller vessels without
opening a large vein.

2. (Agric.) To stir the surface soil of, as a field.

{ Sca"ri*ose (?), Sca"ri*ous (?) }, a. [F. scarieux, NL. scariosus. Cf.
Scary.] (Bot.) Thin, dry, membranous, and not green. Gray.

Scar`la*ti"na (?), n. [NL.: cf. F. scarlatine. See Scarlet.] (Med.)
Scarlet fever. -- Scar`la*ti"nal (#), a. -- Scar*lat"i*nous (# or #),
a.

Scar"less (?), a. Free from scar. Drummond.

Scar"let (?), n. [OE. scarlat, scarlet, OF. escarlate, F. écarlate (cf.
Pr. escarlat, escarlata, Sp. & Pg. escarlata, It. scarlatto, LL.
scarlatum), from Per. sakirlt.] A deep bright red tinged with orange or
yellow, -- of many tints and shades; a vivid or bright red color.

2. Cloth of a scarlet color.

    All her household are clothed with scarlet.


Prov. xxxi. 21.

Scar"let, a. Of the color called scarlet; as, a scarlet cloth or
thread.

Scarlet admiral (Zoöl.), the red admiral. See under Red. -- Scarlet
bean (Bot.), a kind of bean (Phaseolus multiflorus) having scarlet
flowers; scarlet runner. -- Scarlet fever (Med.), a contagious febrile
disease characterized by inflammation of the fauces and a scarlet rash,
appearing usually on the second day, and ending in desquamation about
the sixth or seventh day. -- Scarlet fish (Zoöl.), the telescope fish;
-- so called from its red color. See under Telescope. -- Scarlet ibis
(Zoöl.) See under Ibis. -- Scarlet maple (Bot.), the red maple. See
Maple. -- Scarlet mite (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of bright
red carnivorous mites found among grass and moss, especially Thombidium
holosericeum and allied species. The young are parasitic upon spiders
and insects. -- Scarlet oak (Bot.), a species of oak (Quercus coccinea)
of the United States; -- so called from the scarlet color of its leaves
in autumn. -- Scarlet runner (Bot.), the scarlet bean. -- Scarlet
tanager. (Zoöl.) See under Tanager.

Scar"let, v. t. To dye or tinge with scarlet. [R.]

    The ashy paleness of my cheek Is scarleted in ruddy flakes of
    wrath.


Ford.

{ Scar"mage (?), Scar"moge (?) }, n. A slight contest; a skirmish. See
Skirmish. [Obs.]

    Such cruel game my scarmoges disarms.


Spenser.

Scarn (?), n. [Icel. skarn; akin to AS. scearn. Cf. Shearn.] Dung.
[Obs. or Prov. Eng.] Ray.

Scarn bee (Zoöl.), a dung beetle.

Sca"roid, a. [Scarus + - oid.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Scaridæ,
a family of marine fishes including the parrot fishes.

Scarp (?), n. [OF. escharpe. See 2d Scarf.] (Her.) A band in the same
position as the bend sinister, but only half as broad as the latter.

Scarp, n. [Aphetic form of Escarp.] 1. (Fort.) The slope of the ditch
nearest the parapet; the escarp.

2. A steep descent or declivity.

Scarp, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scarped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scarping.] To
cut down perpendicularly, or nearly so; as, to scarp the face of a
ditch or a rock.

    From scarped cliff and quarried stone.


Tennyson.

    Sweep ruins from the scarped mountain.


Emerson.

Scar"ring (?), n. A scar; a mark.

    We find upon the limestone rocks the scarrings of the ancient
    glacier which brought the bowlder here.


Tyndall.

Scar"ry (?), a. Bearing scars or marks of wounds.

Scar"ry, a. [See 4th Scar.] Like a scar, or rocky eminence; containing
scars. Holinshed.

||Sca"rus (?), n. [L. See Scar a kind of fish.] (Zoöl.) A Mediterranean
||food fish (Sparisoma scarus) of excellent quality and highly valued
||by the Romans; -- called also parrot fish.

Sca"ry (?), n. [Prov. E. scare scraggy.] Barren land having only a thin
coat of grass. [Prov. Eng.]

Scar"y (?), a. [From Scare.] 1. Subject to sudden alarm. [Colloq. U.
S.] Whittier.

2. Causing fright; alarming. [Colloq. U. S.]

Scase"ly (?), adv. Scarcely; hardly. [Obs. or Colloq.] Robynson (More's
Utopia)

Scat (skt), interj. Go away; begone; away; -- chiefly used in driving
off a cat.

{ Scat, Scatt }, n. [Icel. skattr.] Tribute. [R.] "Seizing scatt and
treasure." Longfellow.

Scat, n. A shower of rain. [Prov. Eng.] Wright.

Scatch (?), n. [F. escache.] A kind of bit for the bridle of a horse;
-- called also scatchmouth. Bailey.

Scatch"es (?), n. pl. [OF. eschaces, F. échasses, fr. D. schaats a
high-heeled shoe, a skate. See Skate, for the foot.] Stilts. [Prov.
Eng.]

Scate (skt), n. See Skate, for the foot.

Scat"e*brous (?), a. [L. scatebra a gushing up of water, from scatere
to bubble, gush.] Abounding with springs. [Obs.]

Scath (skth; 277), n. [Icel. skaði; akin to Dan. skade, Sw. skada, AS.
sceaða, scaða, foe, injurer, OS. skaðo, D. schade, harm, injury, OHG.
scade, G. schade, schaden; cf. Gr. 'askhqh`s unharmed. Cf. Scathe, v.]
Harm; damage; injury; hurt; waste; misfortune. [Written also scathe.]

    But she was somedeal deaf, and that was skathe.


Chaucer.

    Great mercy, sure, for to enlarge a thrall, Whose freedom shall
    thee turn to greatest scath.


Spenser.

    Wherein Rome hath done you any scath, Let him make treble
    satisfaction.


Shak.

{ Scathe (sk; 277), Scath (skth; 277) }, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scathed
(skd or sktht); p. pr. & vb. n. Scathing (sk"ng or skth"-).] [Icel.
skaða; akin to AS. sceaðan, sceððan, Dan. skade, Sw. skada, D. & G.
schaden, OHG. scadn, Goth. skaþjan.] To do harm to; to injure; to
damage; to waste; to destroy.

    As when heaven's fire Hath scathed the forest oaks or mountain
    pines.


Milton.

    Strokes of calamity that scathe and scorch the soul.


W. Irving.

Scath"ful (?), a. Harmful; doing damage; pernicious. Shak.

-- Scath"ful*ness, n.

Scath"less, a. Unharmed. R. L. Stevenson.

    He, too, . . . is to be dismissed scathless.


Sir W. Scott.

Scath"ly, a. Injurious; scathful. [Obs.]

Scat"ter (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scattered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scattering.] [OE. scateren. See Shatter.] 1. To strew about; to
sprinkle around; to throw down loosely; to deposit or place here and
there, esp. in an open or sparse order.

    And some are scattered all the floor about.


Chaucer.

    Why should my muse enlarge on Libyan swains, Their scattered
    cottages, and ample plains?


Dryden.

    Teach the glad hours to scatter, as they fly, Soft quiet, gentle
    love, and endless joy.


Prior.

2. To cause to separate in different directions; to reduce from a close
or compact to a loose or broken order; to dissipate; to disperse.

    Scatter and disperse the giddy Goths.


Shak.

3. Hence, to frustrate, disappoint, and overthrow; as, to scatter
hopes, plans, or the like.

Syn. -- To disperse; dissipate; spread; strew.

Scat"ter, v. i. To be dispersed or dissipated; to disperse or separate;
as, clouds scatter after a storm.

Scat"ter-brain` (?), n. A giddy or thoughtless person; one incapable of
concentration or attention. [Written also scatter-brains.]

Scat"ter-brained` (?), a. Giddy; thoughtless.

Scat"tered (?), a. 1. Dispersed; dissipated; sprinkled, or loosely
spread.

2. (Bot.) Irregular in position; having no regular order; as, scattered
leaves.

-- Scat"tered*ly, adv. -- Scat"tered*ness, n.

Scat"ter*good` (?), n. One who wastes; a spendthrift.

Scat"ter*ing, a. Going or falling in various directions; not united or
aggregated; divided among many; as, scattering votes.

Scat"ter*ing, n. Act of strewing about; something scattered. South.

Scat"ter*ing*ly, adv. In a scattering manner; dispersedly.

Scat"ter*ling (?), n. [Scatter + -ling.] One who has no fixed
habitation or residence; a vagabond. [Obs.] "Foreign scatterlings."
Spenser.

Sca*tu"ri*ent (?), a.[L. scaturiens, p. pr. of scaturire gush out, from
scatere to bubble, gush.] Gushing forth; full to overflowing; effusive.
[R.]

    A pen so scaturient and unretentive.


Sir W. Scott.

Scat`u*rig"i*nous (?), a. [L. scaturiginosus, fr. scaturigo gushing
water. See Scaturient.] Abounding with springs. [Obs.]

Scaup (skp), n. [See Scalp a bed of oysters or mussels.] 1. A bed or
stratum of shellfish; scalp. [Scot.]

2. (Zoöl.) A scaup duck. See below.

Scaup duck (Zoöl.), any one of several species of northern ducks of the
genus Aythya, or Fuligula. The adult males are, in large part, black.
The three North American species are: the greater scaup duck (Aythya
marila, var. nearctica), called also broadbill, bluebill, blackhead,
flock duck, flocking fowl, and raft duck; the lesser scaup duck (A.
affinis), called also little bluebill, river broadbill, and shuffler;
the tufted, or ring-necked, scaup duck (A. collaris), called also black
jack, ringneck, ringbill, ringbill shuffler, etc. See Illust.. of
Ring-necked duck, under Ring-necked. The common European scaup, or
mussel, duck (A. marila), closely resembles the American variety.

Scaup"er (?), n. [Cf. Scalper.] A tool with a semicircular edge, --
used by engravers to clear away the spaces between the lines of an
engraving. Fairholt.

Scaur (?), n. A precipitous bank or rock; a scar.

Scav"age (?; 48), n. [LL. scavagium, fr. AS. sceáwian to look at, to
inspect. See Show.] (O. Eng. Law) A toll or duty formerly exacted of
merchant strangers by mayors, sheriffs, etc., for goods shown or
offered for sale within their precincts. Cowell.

Scav"enge (?), v. t. To cleanse, as streets, from filth. C. Kingsley.

Scav"en*ger (?), n. [OE. scavager an officer with various duties,
originally attending to scavage, fr. OE. & E. scavage. See Scavage,
Show, v.] A person whose employment is to clean the streets of a city,
by scraping or sweeping, and carrying off the filth. The name is also
applied to any animal which devours refuse, carrion, or anything
injurious to health.

Scavenger beetle (Zoöl.), any beetle which feeds on decaying
substances, as the carrion beetle. -- Scavenger crab (Zoöl.), any crab
which feeds on dead animals, as the spider crab. -- Scavenger's
daughter [corrupt. of Skevington's daughter], an instrument of torture
invented by Sir W. Skevington, which so compressed the body as to force
the blood to flow from the nostrils, and sometimes from the hands and
feet. Am. Cyc.

||Sca"zon (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. ska`zwn, fr. ska`zein to limp.] (Lat.
||Pros.) A choliamb.

Scel"er*at (?), n. [F. scélérat from L. sceleratus, p. p. of scelerare
to pollute, from scelus, sceleris, a crime.] A villain; a criminal.
[Obs.] Cheyne.

Sce*les"tic (?), a. [L. scelestus, from scelus wickedness.] Evil;
wicked; atrocious. [Obs.] "Scelestic villainies." Feltham.

Scel"et (?), n. [See Skeleton.] A mummy; a skeleton. [Obs.] Holland.

||Sce"na (?), n. [It.] (Mus.) (a) A scene in an opera. (b) An
||accompanied dramatic recitative, interspersed with passages of
||melody, or followed by a full aria. Rockstro.

||Sce*na"ri*o (?), n. [It.] A preliminary sketch of the plot, or main
||incidents, of an opera.

Scen"a*ry (?), n. [Cf. L. scaenarius belonging to the stage.] Scenery.
[Obs.] Dryden.

Scene (?), n. [L. scaena, scena, Gr. skhnh` a covered place, a tent, a
stage.] 1. The structure on which a spectacle or play is exhibited; the
part of a theater in which the acting is done, with its adjuncts and
decorations; the stage.

2. The decorations and fittings of a stage, representing the place in
which the action is supposed to go on; one of the slides, or other
devices, used to give an appearance of reality to the action of a play;
as, to paint scenes; to shift the scenes; to go behind the scenes.

3. So much of a play as passes without change of locality or time, or
important change of character; hence, a subdivision of an act; a
separate portion of a play, subordinate to the act, but differently
determined in different plays; as, an act of four scenes.

    My dismal scene I needs must act alone.


Shak.

4. The place, time, circumstance, etc., in which anything occurs, or in
which the action of a story, play, or the like, is laid; surroundings
amid which anything is set before the imagination; place of occurrence,
exhibition, or action. "In Troy, there lies the scene." Shak.

    The world is a vast scene of strife.


J. M. Mason.

5. An assemblage of objects presented to the view at once; a series of
actions and events exhibited in their connection; a spectacle; a show;
an exhibition; a view.

    Through what new scenes and changes must we pass!


Addison.

6. A landscape, or part of a landscape; scenery.

    A sylvan scene with various greens was drawn, Shades on the sides,
    and in the midst a lawn.


Dryden.

7. An exhibition of passionate or strong feeling before others; often,
an artifical or affected action, or course of action, done for effect;
a theatrical display.

    Probably no lover of scenes would have had very long to wait for
    some explosions between parties, both equally ready to take
    offense, and careless of giving it.


De Quincey.

Behind the scenes, behind the scenery of a theater; out of the view of
the audience, but in sight of the actors, machinery, etc.; hence,
conversant with the hidden motives and agencies of what appears to
public view.

Scene, v. t. To exhibit as a scene; to make a scene of; to display.
[Obs.] Abp. Sancroft.

Scene"ful (?), a. Having much scenery. [R.]

Scene"man (?), n.; pl. Scenemen (&?;). The man who manages the movable
scenes in a theater.

Scen"er*y (?), n. 1. Assemblage of scenes; the paintings and hangings
representing the scenes of a play; the disposition and arrangement of
the scenes in which the action of a play, poem, etc., is laid;
representation of place of action or occurence.

2. Sum of scenes or views; general aspect, as regards variety and
beauty or the reverse, in a landscape; combination of natural views, as
woods, hills, etc.

    Never need an American look beyond his own country for the sublime
    and beautiful of natural scenery.


W. Irving.

Scene"shift`er (?), n. One who moves the scenes in a theater; a
sceneman.

{ Scen"ic (?), Scen"ic*al (?) }, a. [L. scaenicus, scenicus, Gr. &?;:
cf. F. scénique. See Scene.] Of or pertaining to scenery; of the nature
of scenery; theatrical.

    All these situations communicate a scenical animation to the wild
    romance, if treated dramatically.


De Quincey.

Scen"o*graph (?), n. [See Scenography.] A perspective representation or
general view of an object.

{ Scen`o*graph"ic (?), Scen`o*graph"ic*al (?) }, a. [Cf. F.
scénographique, Gr. &?;.] Of or pertaining to scenography; drawn in
perspective. -- Scen`o*graph"ic*al*ly, adv.

Sce*nog"ra*phy (?), n. [L. scaenographia, Gr. &?;; &?; scene, stage +
gra`fein to write: cf. F. scénographie.] The art or act of representing
a body on a perspective plane; also, a representation or description of
a body, in all its dimensions, as it appears to the eye. Greenhill.

Scent (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scented; p. pr. & vb. n. Scenting.]
[Originally sent, fr. F. sentir to feel, to smell. See Sense.] 1. To
perceive by the olfactory organs; to smell; as, to scent game, as a
hound does.

    Methinks I scent the morning air.


Shak.

2. To imbue or fill with odor; to perfume.

    Balm from a silver box distilled around, Shall all bedew the roots,
    and scent the sacred ground.


Dryden.

Scent, v. i. 1. To have a smell. [Obs.]

    Thunderbolts . . . do scent strongly of brimstone.


Holland.

2. To hunt animals by means of the sense of smell.

Scent, n. 1. That which, issuing from a body, affects the olfactory
organs of animals; odor; smell; as, the scent of an orange, or of a
rose; the scent of musk.

    With lavish hand diffuses scents ambrosial.


Prior.

2. Specifically, the odor left by an animal on the ground in passing
over it; as, dogs find or lose the scent; hence, course of pursuit;
track of discovery.

    He gained the observations of innumerable ages, and traveled upon
    the same scent into Ethiopia.


Sir W. Temple.

3. The power of smelling; the sense of smell; as, a hound of nice
scent; to divert the scent. I. Watts.

Scent"ful (?), a. 1. Full of scent or odor; odorous. "A scentful
nosegay." W. Browne.

2. Of quick or keen smell.

    The scentful osprey by the rock had fished.


W. Browne.

Scent"ing*ly (?), adv. By scent. [R.] Fuller.

Scent"less, a. Having no scent.

    The scentless and the scented rose.


Cowper.

||Scep"sis (?), n. [NL., from Gr. &?; doubt, fr. &?; to consider: cf.
||G. skepsis. See Skeptic.] Skepticism; skeptical philosophy. [R.]

    Among their products were the system of Locke, the scepsis of Hume,
    the critical philosophy of Kant.


J. Martineau.

{ Scep"ter, Scep"tre } (?), n. [F. sceptre, L. sceptrum, from Gr. &?; a
staff to lean upon, a scepter; probably akin to E. shaft. See Shaft,
and cf. Scape a stem, shaft.] 1. A staff or baton borne by a sovereign,
as a ceremonial badge or emblem of authority; a royal mace.

    And the king held out Esther the golden scepter that was in his
    hand.


Esther v. 2.

2. Hence, royal or imperial power or authority; sovereignty; as, to
assume the scepter.

    The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from
    between his feet, until Shiloh come.


Gen. xlix. 10.

{ Scep"ter, Scep"tre }, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sceptered (?) or Sceptred
(&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Sceptering (?) or Sceptring (&?;).] To endow
with the scepter, or emblem of authority; to invest with royal
authority.

    To Britain's queen the sceptered suppliant bends.


Tickell.

Scep`ter*el"late (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a straight shaft with whorls of
spines; -- said of certain sponge spicules. See Illust. under Spicule.

{ Scep"ter*less, Scep"tre*less }, a. Having no scepter; without
authority; powerless; as, a scepterless king.

{ Scep"tic (?), Scep"tic*al, Scep"ti*cism, etc.} See Skeptic,
Skeptical, Skepticism, etc.

Scep"tral (?), a. Of or pertaining to a scepter; like a scepter.

Scern (?), v. t. To discern; to perceive. [Obs.]

Schade (?), n. Shade; shadow. [Obs.]

English words now beginning with sh, like shade, were formerly often
spelled with a c between the s and h; as, schade; schame; schape;
schort, etc.

Schah (?), n. See Shah.

Sche"di*asm (?), n. [Gr. &?; an extempore, fr. &?; to do offhand, &?;
sudden, fr. &?; near.] Cursory writing on a loose sheet. [R.]

Sched"ule (?; in England commonly ?; 277), n. [F. cédule, formerly also
spelt schedule, L. schedula, dim. of scheda, scida, a strip of papyrus
bark, a leaf of paper; akin to (or perh. from) Gr. &?; a tablet, leaf,
and to L. scindere to cleave, Gr. &?;. See Schism, and cf. Cedule.] A
written or printed scroll or sheet of paper; a document; especially, a
formal list or inventory; a list or catalogue annexed to a larger
document, as to a will, a lease, a statute, etc.

Syn. -- Catalogue; list; inventory. see List.

Sched"ule, v. t. To form into, or place in, a schedule.

Scheele's" green` (?). [See Scheelite.] (Chem.) See under Green.

Scheel"in (?), n. (Chem.) Scheelium. [Obs.]

Scheel"ite (&?;), n. [From C.W. Scheele, a Swedish chemist.] (Min.)
Calcium tungstate, a mineral of a white or pale yellowish color and of
the tetragonal system of crystallization.

Schee"li*um (?), n. [NL. From C.W. Scheele, who discovered it.] (Chem.)
The metal tungsten. [Obs.]

Scheik (shk or shk), n. See Sheik.

Schel"ly (?), n. (Zoöl.) The powan. [Prov. Eng.]

||Sche"ma (?), n.; pl. Schemata (#), E. Schemas (#). [G. See Scheme.]
||(Kantian Philos.) An outline or image universally applicable to a
||general conception, under which it is likely to be presented to the
||mind; as, five dots in a line are a schema of the number five; a
||preceding and succeeding event are a schema of cause and effect.

Sche*mat"ic (?), a. [Cf. Gr. &?; pretended.] Of or pertaining to a
scheme or a schema.

Sche"ma*tism (?), n. [Cf. F. schématisme (cf. L. schematismos florid
speech), fr. Gr. &?;, fr. &?; to form. See Scheme.] 1. (Astrol.)
Combination of the aspects of heavenly bodies.

2. Particular form or disposition of a thing; an exhibition in outline
of any systematic arrangement. [R.]

Sche"ma*tist (?), n. One given to forming schemes; a projector; a
schemer. Swift.

Sche"ma*tize (?), v. i. [Cf. F. schématiser, Gr. &?;.] To form a scheme
or schemes.

Scheme (?), n. [L. schema a rhetorical figure, a shape, figure, manner,
Gr. &?;, &?;, form, shape, outline, plan, fr. &?;, &?;, to have or
hold, to hold out, sustain, check, stop; cf. Skr. sah to be victorious,
to endure, to hold out, AS. sige victory, G. sieg. Cf. Epoch, Hectic,
School.] 1. A combination of things connected and adjusted by design; a
system.

    The appearance and outward scheme of things.


Locke.

    Such a scheme of things as shall at once take in time and eternity.


Atterbury.

    Arguments . . . sufficient to support and demonstrate a whole
    scheme of moral philosophy.


J. Edwards.

    The Revolution came and changed his whole scheme of life.


Macaulay.

2. A plan or theory something to be done; a design; a project; as, to
form a scheme.

    The stoical scheme of supplying our wants by lopping off our
    desires, is like cutting off our feet when we want shoes.


Swift.

3. Any lineal or mathematical diagram; an outline.

    To draw an exact scheme of Constantinople, or a map of France.


South.

4. (Astrol.) A representation of the aspects of the celestial bodies
for any moment or at a given event.

    A blue silk case, from which was drawn a scheme of nativity.


Sir W. Scott.

Syn. -- Plan; project; contrivance; purpose; device; plot. -- Scheme,
Plan. Scheme and plan are subordinate to design; they propose modes of
carrying our designs into effect. Scheme is the least definite of the
two, and lies more in speculation. A plan is drawn out into details
with a view to being carried into effect. As schemes are speculative,
they often prove visionary; hence the opprobrious use of the words
schemer and scheming. Plans, being more practical, are more frequently
carried into effect.

    He forms the well-concerted scheme of mischief; 'T is fixed, 't is
    done, and both are doomed to death.


Rowe.

    Artists and plans relieved my solemn hours; I founded palaces, and
    planted bowers.


Prior.

Scheme, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Schemed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scheming.] To
make a scheme of; to plan; to design; to project; to plot.

    That wickedness which schemed, and executed, his destruction.


G. Stuart.

Scheme, v. i. To form a scheme or schemes.

Scheme"ful (?), a. Full of schemes or plans.

Schem"er (?), n. One who forms schemes; a projector; esp., a plotter;
an intriguer.

    Schemers and confederates in guilt.


Paley.

Schem"ing, a. Given to forming schemes; artful; intriguing. --
Schem"ing*ly, adv.

Schem"ist, n. A schemer. [R.] Waterland.

Schene (?), n. [L. schoenus, Gr. &?; a rush, a reed, a land measure:
cf. F. schène.] (Antiq.) An Egyptian or Persian measure of length,
varying from thirty-two to sixty stadia.

Schenk"beer` (?), n. [G. schenkbier; schenken to pour out + bier beer;
-- so called because put on draught soon after it is made.] A mild
German beer.

Scher"bet (?), n. See Sherbet.

||Scher"if (? or ?), n. See Sherif.

||Scher*zan"do (?), adv. [It.] (Mus.) In a playful or sportive manner.

||Scher"zo (?), n. [It.] (Mus.) A playful, humorous movement, commonly
||in 3-4 measure, which often takes the place of the old minuet and
||trio in a sonata or a symphony.

||Sche"sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;, fr. &?;, &?;, to have or hold.
||See Scheme.] 1. General state or disposition of the body or mind, or
||of one thing with regard to other things; habitude. [Obs.] Norris.

2. (Rhet.) A figure of speech whereby the mental habitude of an
adversary or opponent is feigned for the purpose of arguing against
him. Crabb.

{ Schet"ic (?), Schet"ic*al (?) }, a. [Cf. Gr. &?; holding back.] Of or
pertaining to the habit of the body; constitutional. [Obs.] Cudworth.

Schie*dam" (?), n. [Short for Schiedam schnapps.] Holland gin made at
Schiedam in the Netherlands.

Schil"ler (?), n. [G., play of colors.] (Min.) The peculiar bronzelike
luster observed in certain minerals, as hypersthene, schiller spar,
etc. It is due to the presence of minute inclusions in parallel
position, and is sometimes of secondary origin.

Schiller spar (Min.), an altered variety of enstatite, exhibiting, in
certain positions, a bronzelike luster.

Schil`ler*i*za"tion (&?;), n. (Min.) The act or process of producing
schiller in a mineral mass.

Schil"ling (?), n. [G. See Shilling.] Any one of several small German
and Dutch coins, worth from about one and a half cents to about five
cents.

||Schin`dy*le"sis (?), n. [NL., from Gr. &?; a splitting into
||fragments.] (Anat.) A form of articulation in which one bone is
||received into a groove or slit in another.

Schir"rhus (?), n. See Scirrhus.

Schism (?), n. [OE. scisme, OF. cisme, scisme, F. schisme, L. schisma,
Gr. schi`sma, fr. schi`zein to split; akin to L. scindere, Skr. chid,
and prob. to E. shed, v.t. (which see); cf. Rescind, Schedule, Zest.]
Division or separation; specifically (Eccl.), permanent division or
separation in the Christian church; breach of unity among people of the
same religious faith; the offense of seeking to produce division in a
church without justifiable cause.

    Set bounds to our passions by reason, to our errors by truth, and
    to our schisms by charity.


Eikon Basilike.

Greek schism (Eccl.), the separation of the Greek and Roman churches.
-- Great schism, or Western schism (Eccl.) a schism in the Roman church
in the latter part of the 14th century, on account of rival claimants
to the papal throne. -- Schism act (Law), an act of the English
Parliament requiring all teachers to conform to the Established Church,
-- passed in 1714, repealed in 1719.

||Schis"ma (?), n. [L., a split, separation, Gr. schi`sma: cf. F.
||schisma. See Schism.] (Anc. Mus.) An interval equal to half a comma.

Schis*mat"ic (sz*mt"k; so nearly all orthoëpists), a. [L. schismaticus,
Gr. &?;: cf. F. schismatique.] Of or pertaining to schism; implying
schism; partaking of the nature of schism; tending to schism; as,
schismatic opinions or proposals.

Schis*mat"ic (?; 277), n. One who creates or takes part in schism; one
who separates from an established church or religious communion on
account of a difference of opinion. "They were popularly classed
together as canting schismatics." Macaulay.

Syn. -- Heretic; partisan. See Heretic.

Schis*mat"ic*al (?), a. Same as Schismatic. -- Schis*mat"ic*al*ly, adv.
-- Schis*mat"ic*al*ness, n.

Schis"ma*tize (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Schismatized (?); p. pr. & vb.
n. Schismatizing (?).] [Cf. F. schismatiser.] To take part in schism;
to make a breach of communion in the church.

Schism"less (?), a. Free from schism.

Schist (shst), n. [Gr. &?; divided, divisible, fr. &?; to divide: cf.
F. schiste. See Schism.] (Geol.) Any crystalline rock having a foliated
structure (see Foliation) and hence admitting of ready division into
slabs or slates. The common kinds are mica schist, and hornblendic
schist, consisting chiefly of quartz with mica or hornblende and often
feldspar.

Schis*ta"ceous (?), a. Of a slate color.

Schist"ic (?), a. Schistose.

{ Schis*tose" (?; 277), Schist*ous (?) }, a. [Cf. F. schisteux.]
(Geol.) Of or pertaining to schist; having the structure of a schist.

Schis*tos"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. schistosité.] (Geol.) The quality or
state of being schistose.

Schiz"o- (?). [Gr. &?; to split, cleave.] A combining form denoting
division or cleavage; as, schizogenesis, reproduction by fission or
cell division.

Schiz"o*carp (?), n. [Schizo- + Gr. &?; fruit.] (Bot.) A dry fruit
which splits at maturity into several closed one-seeded portions.

Schiz"o*cœle (?), n. [Schizo-  + Gr. &?; hollow.] (Anat.) See
Enterocœle.

Schiz`o*cœ"lous (?), a. (Zoöl.) Pertaining to, or of the nature of, a
schizocœle.

Schiz`o*gen"e*sis (?), n. [Schizo-  + genesis.] (Biol.) Reproduction by
fission. Haeckel.

Schiz"og*nath (?), n. [See Schizognathous.] (Zoöl.) Any bird with a
schizognathous palate.

||Schi*zog"na*thæ (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) The schizognathous birds.

Schi*zog"na*thism (?), n. (Zoöl.) The condition of having a
schizognathous palate.

Schi*zog"na*thous (?), a. [Schizo-  + Gr. &?; the jaw.] (Zoöl.) Having
the maxillo- palatine bones separate from each other and from the
vomer, which is pointed in front, as in the gulls, snipes, grouse, and
many other birds.

||Schiz`o*my*ce"tes (?), n. pl., [NL., fr. Gr. &?; to split + &?;,
||-&?;, a fungus.] (Biol.) An order of Schizophyta, including the
||so-called fission fungi, or bacteria. See Schizophyta, in the
||Supplement.

||Schiz`o*ne*mer"te*a (?), n. pl. [NL. See Schizo-, and Nemertes.]
||(Zoöl.) A group of nemerteans comprising those having a deep slit
||along each side of the head. See Illust. in Appendix.

Schiz`o*pel"mous (?), a. [Schizo- + Gr. pe`lma the sole of the foot.]
(Zoöl.) Having the two flexor tendons of the toes entirely separate,
and the flexor hallucis going to the first toe only.

Schiz"o*phyte (?), n. [Schizo- + Gr. &?; a plant.] (Biol.) One of a
class of vegetable organisms, in the classification of Cohn, which
includes all of the inferior forms that multiply by fission, whether
they contain chlorophyll or not.

Schiz"o*pod (?; 277), n. (Zoöl.) one of the Schizopoda. Also used
adjectively.

{ Schiz"o*pod (?; 277), Schi*zop"o*dous (?) }, a. Of or pertaining to a
schizopod, or the Schizopoda.

||Schi*zop"o*da (?), n. pl., [NL. See Schizo-, and -poda.] (Zoöl.) A
||division of shrimplike Thoracostraca in which each of the thoracic
||legs has a long fringed upper branch (exopodite) for swimming.

Schiz`o*rhi"nal (?), a. [Schizo- + rhinal.] 1. (Anat.) Having the nasal
bones separate.

2. (Zoöl.) Having the anterior nostrils prolonged backward in the form
of a slit.

||Schlich (?), n. [G.; akin to LG. slick mud, D. slijk, MHG. slch.]
||(Metal.) The finer portion of a crushed ore, as of gold, lead, or
||tin, separated by the water in certain wet processes. [Written also
||slich, slick.]

Schmel"ze (?), n. [G. schmelz, schmelzglas.] A kind of glass of a red
or ruby color, made in Bohemia.

Schnapps (?), n. [G., a dram of spirits.] Holland gin. [U.S.]

Schnei*de"ri*an (&?;), a. (Anat.) Discovered or described by C. V.
Schneider, a German anatomist of the seventeenth century.

Schneiderian membrane, the mucous membrane which lines the nasal
chambers; the pituitary membrane.

Scho*har"ie grit` (?). (Geol.) The formation belonging to the middle of
the three subdivisions of the Corniferous period in the American
Devonian system; -- so called from Schoharie, in New York, where it
occurs. See the Chart of Geology.

Schol"ar (?), n. [OE. scoler, AS. sclere, fr. L. scholaris belonging to
a school, fr. schola a school. See School.] 1. One who attends a
school; one who learns of a teacher; one under the tuition of a
preceptor; a pupil; a disciple; a learner; a student.

    I am no breeching scholar in the schools.


Shak.

2. One engaged in the pursuits of learning; a learned person; one
versed in any branch, or in many branches, of knowledge; a person of
high literary or scientific attainments; a savant. Shak. Locke.

3. A man of books. Bacon.

4. In English universities, an undergraduate who belongs to the
foundation of a college, and receives support in part from its
revenues.

Syn. -- Pupil; learner; disciple. -- Scholar, Pupil. Scholar refers to
the instruction, and pupil to the care and government, of a teacher. A
scholar is one who is under instruction; a pupil is one who is under
the immediate and personal care of an instructor; hence we speak of a
bright scholar, and an obedient pupil.

Scho*lar"i*ty (?), n. [OF. scholarité, or LL. scholaritas.]
Scholarship. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Schol"ar*like` (?), a. Scholarly. Bacon.

Schol"ar*ly, a. Like a scholar, or learned person; showing the
qualities of a scholar; as, a scholarly essay or critique. -- adv. In a
scholarly manner.

Schol"ar*ship, n. 1. The character and qualities of a scholar;
attainments in science or literature; erudition; learning.

    A man of my master's . . . great scholarship.


Pope.

2. Literary education. [R.]

    Any other house of scholarship.


Milton.

3. Maintenance for a scholar; a foundation for the support of a
student. T. Warton.

Syn. -- Learning; erudition; knowledge.

Scho*las"tic (?), a. [L. scholasticus, Gr. &?;, fr. &?; to have
leisure, to give lectures, to keep a school, from &?; leisure, a
lecture, a school: cf. F. scholastique, scolastique. See School.] 1.
Pertaining to, or suiting, a scholar, a school, or schools;
scholarlike; as, scholastic manners or pride; scholastic learning. Sir
K. Digby.

2. Of or pertaining to the schoolmen and divines of the Middle Ages
(see Schoolman); as, scholastic divinity or theology; scholastic
philosophy. Locke.

3. Hence, characterized by excessive subtilty, or needlessly minute
subdivisions; pedantic; formal.

Scho*las"tic, n. 1. One who adheres to the method or subtilties of the
schools. Milton.

2. (R. C. Ch.) See the Note under Jesuit.

Scho*las"tic*al (?), a. & n. Scholastic.

Scho*las"tic*al*ly, adv. In a scholastic manner.

Scho*las"ti*cism (?), n. The method or subtilties of the schools of
philosophy; scholastic formality; scholastic doctrines or philosophy.

    The spirit of the old scholasticism . . . spurned laborious
    investigation and slow induction.


J. P. Smith.

Scho"li*a (?), n. pl. See Scholium.

Scho"li*ast (?), n. [Gr. &?;, fr. &?; a scholium: cf. F. scoliate. See
Scholium.] A maker of scholia; a commentator or annotator.

    No . . . quotations from Talmudists and scholiasts . . . ever
    marred the effect of his grave temperate discourses.


Macaulay.

Scho`li*as"tic (?), a. Of or pertaining to a scholiast, or his
pursuits. Swift.

Scho"li*aze (?), v. i. [Cf. Gr. &?;.] To write scholia. [Obs.] Milton.

Schol"ic*al (?), a. [L. scholicus, Gr. &?;, fr. &?;. See School.]
Scholastic. [Obs.] Hales.

||Scho"li*on (?), n. [NL.] A scholium.

    A judgment which follows immediately from another is sometimes
    called a corollary, or consectary . . . One which illustrates the
    science where it appears, but is not an integral part of it, is a
    scholion.


Abp. Thomson (Laws of Thought).

Scho"li*um (?), n.; pl. L. Scholia (#), E. Scholiums (#). [NL., fr. Gr.
&?;, fr. &?;. See School.] 1. A marginal annotation; an explanatory
remark or comment; specifically, an explanatory comment on the text of
a classic author by an early grammarian.

2. A remark or observation subjoined to a demonstration or a train of
reasoning.

Scho"ly (?), n. A scholium. [Obs.] Hooker.

Scho"ly (?), v. i. & t. To write scholia; to annotate. [Obs.]

School (?), n. [For shoal a crowd; prob. confused with school for
learning.] A shoal; a multitude; as, a school of fish.

School, n. [OE. scole, AS. sc&?;lu, L. schola, Gr. &?; leisure, that in
which leisure is employed, disputation, lecture, a school, probably
from the same root as &?;, the original sense being perhaps, a
stopping, a resting. See Scheme.] 1. A place for learned intercourse
and instruction; an institution for learning; an educational
establishment; a place for acquiring knowledge and mental training; as,
the school of the prophets.

    Disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus.


Acts xix. 9.

2. A place of primary instruction; an establishment for the instruction
of children; as, a primary school; a common school; a grammar school.

    As he sat in the school at his primer.


Chaucer.

3. A session of an institution of instruction.

    How now, Sir Hugh! No school to- day?


Shak.

4. One of the seminaries for teaching logic, metaphysics, and theology,
which were formed in the Middle Ages, and which were characterized by
academical disputations and subtilties of reasoning.

    At Cambridge the philosophy of Descartes was still dominant in the
    schools.


Macaulay.

5. The room or hall in English universities where the examinations for
degrees and honors are held.

6. An assemblage of scholars; those who attend upon instruction in a
school of any kind; a body of pupils.

    What is the great community of Christians, but one of the
    innumerable schools in the vast plan which God has instituted for
    the education of various intelligences?


Buckminster.

7. The disciples or followers of a teacher; those who hold a common
doctrine, or accept the same teachings; a sect or denomination in
philosophy, theology, science, medicine, politics, etc.

    Let no man be less confident in his faith . . . by reason of any
    difference in the several schools of Christians.


Jer. Taylor.

8. The canons, precepts, or body of opinion or practice, sanctioned by
the authority of a particular class or age; as, he was a gentleman of
the old school.

    His face pale but striking, though not handsome after the schools.


A. S. Hardy.

9. Figuratively, any means of knowledge or discipline; as, the school
of experience.

Boarding school, Common school, District school, Normal school, etc.
See under Boarding, Common, District, etc. -- High school, a free
public school nearest the rank of a college. [U. S.] -- School board, a
corporation established by law in every borough or parish in England,
and elected by the burgesses or ratepayers, with the duty of providing
public school accommodation for all children in their district. --
School committee, School board, an elected committee of citizens having
charge and care of the public schools in any district, town, or city,
and responsible for control of the money appropriated for school
purposes. [U. S.] -- School days, the period in which youth are sent to
school. -- School district, a division of a town or city for
establishing and conducting schools. [U.S.] -- Sunday school, or
Sabbath school, a school held on Sunday for study of the Bible and for
religious instruction; the pupils, or the teachers and pupils, of such
a school, collectively.

School, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Schooled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Schooling.]
1. To train in an institution of learning; to educate at a school; to
teach.

    He's gentle, never schooled, and yet learned.


Shak.

2. To tutor; to chide and admonish; to reprove; to subject to
systematic discipline; to train.

    It now remains for you to school your child, And ask why God's
    Anointed be reviled.


Dryden.

    The mother, while loving her child with the intensity of a sole
    affection, had schooled herself to hope for little other return
    than the waywardness of an April breeze.


Hawthorne.

School"book` (?), n. A book used in schools for learning lessons.

School"boy` (?), n. A boy belonging to, or attending, a school.

School"dame` (?). n. A schoolmistress.

School"er*y (&?;), n. Something taught; precepts; schooling. [Obs.]
Spenser.

School"fel`low (?), n. One bred at the same school; an associate in
school.

School"girl` (?), n. A girl belonging to, or attending, a school.

School"house` (?), n. A house appropriated for the use of a school or
schools, or for instruction.

School"ing, n. 1. Instruction in school; tuition; education in an
institution of learning; act of teaching.

2. Discipline; reproof; reprimand; as, he gave his son a good
schooling. Sir W. Scott.

3. Compensation for instruction; price or reward paid to an instructor
for teaching pupils.

School"ing, a. [See School a shoal.] (Zoöl.) Collecting or running in
schools or shoals.

    Schooling species like the herring and menhaden.


G. B. Goode.

School"ma'am (?), n. A schoolmistress. [Colloq.U.S.]

School"maid` (?), n. A schoolgirl. Shak.

School"man` (?), n.; pl. Schoolmen (&?;). One versed in the niceties of
academical disputation or of school divinity.

The schoolmen were philosophers and divines of the Middle Ages, esp.
from the 11th century to the Reformation, who spent much time on points
of nice and abstract speculation. They were so called because they
taught in the mediæval universities and schools of divinity.

School"mas`ter (?), n. 1. The man who presides over and teaches a
school; a male teacher of a school.

    Let the soldier be abroad if he will; he can do nothing in this
    age. There is another personage abroad, -- a person less imposing,
    -- in the eyes of some, perhaps, insignificant. The schoolmaster is
    abroad; and I trust to him, armed with his primer, against the
    soldier in full military array.


Brougham.

2. One who, or that which, disciplines and directs.

    The law was our schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ.


Gal. iii. 24.

School"mate` (?), n. A pupil who attends the same school as another.

School"mis`tress (?), n. A woman who governs and teaches a school; a
female school-teacher.

School"room` (?), n. A room in which pupils are taught.

School"ship` (?), n. A vessel employed as a nautical training school,
in which naval apprentices receive their education at the expense of
the state, and are trained for service as sailors. Also, a vessel used
as a reform school to which boys are committed by the courts to be
disciplined, and instructed as mariners.

School"-teach`er (?), n. One who teaches or instructs a school. --
School"-teach`ing, n.

School"ward (?), adv. Toward school. Chaucer.

Schoon"er (?), n. [See the Note below. Cf. Shun.] (Naut.) Originally, a
small, sharp-built vessel, with two masts and fore-and-aft rig.
Sometimes it carried square topsails on one or both masts and was
called a topsail schooner. About 1840, longer vessels with three masts,
fore-and- aft rigged, came into use, and since that time vessels with
four masts and even with six masts, so rigged, are built. Schooners
with more than two masts are designated three-masted schooners, four-
masted schooners, etc. See Illustration in Appendix.

The first schooner ever constructed is said to have been built in
Gloucester, Massachusetts, about the year 1713, by a Captain Andrew
Robinson, and to have received its name from the following trivial
circumstance: When the vessel went off the stocks into the water, a
bystander cried out,"O, how she scoons!" Robinson replied, " A scooner
let her be;" and, from that time, vessels thus masted and rigged have
gone by this name. The word scoon is popularly used in some parts of
New England to denote the act of making stones skip along the surface
of water. The Scottish scon means the same thing. Both words are
probably allied to the Icel. skunda, skynda, to make haste, hurry, AS.
scunian to avoid, shun, Prov. E. scun. In the New England records, the
word appears to have been originally written scooner. Babson, in his
"History of Gloucester," gives the following extract from a letter
written in that place Sept. 25, 1721, by Dr. Moses Prince, brother of
the Rev. Thomas Prince, the annalist of New England: "This gentleman
(Captain Robinson) was first contriver of schooners, and built the
first of that sort about eight years since."

Schoon"er, n. [D.] A large goblet or drinking glass, -- used for lager
beer or ale. [U.S.]

Schorl (shôrl), n. [G. schörl; cf. Sw. skörl.] (Min.) Black tourmaline.
[Written also shorl.]

Schor*la"ceous (?), a. Partaking of the nature and character of schorl;
resembling schorl.

Schorl"ous (?), a. Schorlaceous.

Schorl"y> (&?;), a. Pertaining to, or containing, schorl; as, schorly
granite.

{ Schot"tish, Schot"tische }, (&?;), n. [F. schottish, schotisch from
G. schottisch Scottish, Scotch.] A Scotch round dance in 2-4 time,
similar to the polka, only slower; also, the music for such a dance; --
not to be confounded with the Écossaise.

Schrei"bers*ite (?), n. [Named after Carl von Schreibers, of Vienna.]
(Min.) A mineral occurring in steel-gray flexible folia. It contains
iron, nickel, and phosphorus, and is found only in meteoric iron.

Schrode (?), n. See Scrod.

Schwann's" sheath` (?). [So called from Theodor Schwann, a German
anatomist of the 19th century.] (Anat.) The neurilemma.

Schwann's white" sub"stance (?). (Anat.) The substance of the medullary
sheath.

Schwan"pan` (?), n. Chinese abacus.

||Schweit"zer*kä"se (?), n. [G. schweizerkäse Swiss cheese.] Gruyère
||cheese.

{ Schwenk"feld`er (?), Schwenk"feld`i*an (?) }, n. A member of a
religious sect founded by Kaspar von Schwenkfeld, a Silesian reformer
who disagreed with Luther, especially on the deification of the body of
Christ.

Sci*æ"noid (?), a. [L. sciæna a kind of fish (fr. Gr. &?;) + -oid.]
(Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Sciænidæ, a family of marine fishes
which includes the meagre, the squeteague, and the kingfish.

Sci"a*graph (?), n. [See Sciagraphy.] 1. (Arch.) An old term for a
vertical section of a building; -- called also sciagraphy. See Vertical
section, under Section.

2. (Phys.) A radiograph. [Written also skiagraph.]

Sci`a*graph"ic*al (?), a. [Cf. F. sciagraphique, Gr. &?;.] Pertaining
to sciagraphy. - - Sci`a*graph"ic*al*ly, adv.

Sci*ag"ra*phy (?), n. [Gr. &?;, fr. &?; drawing in light and shade; &?;
a shadow + &?; to delineate, describe: cf. F. sciagraphie.] 1. The art
or science of projecting or delineating shadows as they fall in nature.
Gwilt.

2. (Arch.) Same as Sciagraph.

Sci*am"a*chy (?), n. See Sciomachy.

{ Sci`a*ther"ic (?), Sci`a*ther"ic*al (?) }, a. [Gr. &?;, fr. &?; a
sundial; &?; a shadow + &?; to hunt, to catch.] Belonging to a sundial.
[Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

-- Sci`a*ther"ic*al*ly, adv. [Obs.] J. Gregory.

Sci*at"ic (?), a. [F. sciatique, LL. sciaticus, from L. ischiadicus,
Gr. &?;. See Ischiadic.] (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the hip; in the
region of, or affecting, the hip; ischial; ischiatic; as, the sciatic
nerve, sciatic pains.

Sci*at"ic, n. [Cf. F. sciatique.] (Med.) Sciatica.

Sci*at"i*ca (?), n. [NL.] (Med.) Neuralgia of the sciatic nerve, an
affection characterized by paroxysmal attacks of pain in the buttock,
back of the thigh, or in the leg or foot, following the course of the
branches of the sciatic nerve. The name is also popularly applied to
various painful affections of the hip and the parts adjoining it. See
Ischiadic passion, under Ischiadic.

Sci*at"ic*al (?), a. (Anat.) Sciatic.

Sci*at"ic*al*ly, adv. With, or by means of, sciatica.

Scib"bo*leth (?), n. Shibboleth. [Obs.]

Sci"ence (?), n. [F., fr. L. scientia, fr. sciens, -entis, p. pr. of
scire to know. Cf. Conscience, Conscious, Nice.] 1. Knowledge;
knowledge of principles and causes; ascertained truth of facts.

    If we conceive God's sight or science, before the creation, to be
    extended to all and every part of the world, seeing everything as
    it is, . . . his science or sight from all eternity lays no
    necessity on anything to come to pass.


Hammond.

    Shakespeare's deep and accurate science in mental philosophy.


Coleridge.

2. Accumulated and established knowledge, which has been systematized
and formulated with reference to the discovery of general truths or the
operation of general laws; knowledge classified and made available in
work, life, or the search for truth; comprehensive, profound, or
philosophical knowledge.

    All this new science that men lere [teach].


Chaucer.

    Science is . . . a complement of cognitions, having, in point of
    form, the character of logical perfection, and in point of matter,
    the character of real truth.


Sir W. Hamilton.

3. Especially, such knowledge when it relates to the physical world and
its phenomena, the nature, constitution, and forces of matter, the
qualities and functions of living tissues, etc.; -- called also natural
science, and physical science.

    Voltaire hardly left a single corner of the field entirely
    unexplored in science, poetry, history, philosophy.


J. Morley.

4. Any branch or department of systematized knowledge considered as a
distinct field of investigation or object of study; as, the science of
astronomy, of chemistry, or of mind.

The ancients reckoned seven sciences, namely, grammar, rhetoric, logic,
arithmetic, music, geometry, and astronomy; -- the first three being
included in the Trivium, the remaining four in the Quadrivium.

    Good sense, which only is the gift of Heaven, And though no
    science, fairly worth the seven.


Pope.

5. Art, skill, or expertness, regarded as the result of knowledge of
laws and principles.

    His science, coolness, and great strength.


G. A. Lawrence.

Science is applied or pure. Applied science is a knowledge of facts,
events, or phenomena, as explained, accounted for, or produced, by
means of powers, causes, or laws. Pure science is the knowledge of
these powers, causes, or laws, considered apart, or as pure from all
applications. Both these terms have a similar and special signification
when applied to the science of quantity; as, the applied and pure
mathematics. Exact science is knowledge so systematized that prediction
and verification, by measurement, experiment, observation, etc., are
possible. The mathematical and physical sciences are called the exact
sciences.

Comparative sciences, Inductive sciences. See under Comparative, and
Inductive.

Syn. -- Literature; art; knowledge. -- Science, Literature, Art.
Science is literally knowledge, but more usually denotes a systematic
and orderly arrangement of knowledge. In a more distinctive sense,
science embraces those branches of knowledge of which the
subject-matter is either ultimate principles, or facts as explained by
principles or laws thus arranged in natural order. The term literature
sometimes denotes all compositions not embraced under science, but
usually confined to the belles-lettres. [See Literature.] Art is that
which depends on practice and skill in performance. "In science, scimus
ut sciamus; in art, scimus ut producamus. And, therefore, science and
art may be said to be investigations of truth; but one, science,
inquires for the sake of knowledge; the other, art, for the sake of
production; and hence science is more concerned with the higher truths,
art with the lower; and science never is engaged, as art is, in
productive application. And the most perfect state of science,
therefore, will be the most high and accurate inquiry; the perfection
of art will be the most apt and efficient system of rules; art always
throwing itself into the form of rules." Karslake.

Sci"ence, v. t. To cause to become versed in science; to make skilled;
to instruct. [R.] Francis.

Sci"ent (?), a. [L. sciens, - entis, p. pr.] Knowing; skillful. [Obs.]
Cockeram.

||Sci*en"ter (?), adv. [L.] (Law) Knowingly; willfully. Bouvier.

Sci*en"tial (?), a. [LL. scientialis, fr. L. scientia.] Pertaining to,
or producing, science. [R.] Milton.

Sci`en*tif"ic (?), a. [F. scientifique; L. scientia science + facere to
make.] 1. Of or pertaining to science; used in science; as, scientific
principles; scientific apparatus; scientific observations.

2. Agreeing with, or depending on, the rules or principles of science;
as, a scientific classification; a scientific arrangement of fossils.

3. Having a knowledge of science, or of a science; evincing science or
systematic knowledge; as, a scientific chemist; a scientific reasoner;
a scientific argument.

    Bossuet is as scientific in the structure of his sentences.


Landor.

Scientific method, the method employed in exact science and consisting
of: (a) Careful and abundant observation and experiment. (b)
generalization of the results into formulated "Laws" and statements.

Sci`en*tif"ic*al (?), a. Scientific. Locke.

Sci`en*tif"ic*al*ly, adv. In a scientific manner; according to the
rules or principles of science.

    It is easier to believe than to be scientifically instructed.


Locke.

Sci"en*tist (?), n. One learned in science; a scientific investigator;
one devoted to scientific study; a savant. [Recent]

Twenty years ago I ventured to propose one [a name for the class of men
who give their lives to scientific study] which has been slowly finding
its way to general adoption; and the word scientist, though scarcely
euphonious, has gradually assumed its place in our vocabulary. B. A.
Gould (Address, 1869).

Scil"i*cet (?), adv. [L., fr. scire licet you may know.] To wit;
namely; videlicet; -- often abbreviated to sc., or ss.

Scil"la*in (?), n. (Chem.) A glucoside extracted from squill (Scilla)
as a light porous substance.

Scil"li*tin (?), n. [Cf. F. scilitine.] (Chem.) A bitter principle
extracted from the bulbs of the squill (Scilla), and probably
consisting of a complex mixture of several substances.

{ Scim"i*ter , Scim"i*tar } (?), n. [F. cimeterre, cf. It. scimitarra,
Sp. cimitarra; fr. Biscayan cimetarra with a sharp edge; or corrupted
from Per. shimshr.] 1. A saber with a much curved blade having the edge
on the convex side, -- in use among Mohammedans, esp., the Arabs and
persians. [Written also cimeter, and scymetar.]

2. A long-handled billhook. See Billhook.

Scimiter pods (Bot.), the immense curved woody pods of a leguminous
woody climbing plant (Entada scandens) growing in tropical India and
America. They contain hard round flattish seeds two inches in diameter,
which are made into boxes.

Scin"coid (?), a. [L. scincus a kind of lizard (fr. Gr. &?;) + -oid.
Cf. Skink.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the family Scincidæ, or skinks.
-- n. A scincoidian.

||Scin*coi"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A tribe of lizards including
||the skinks. See Skink.

Scin*coid"i*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of lizards
of the family Scincidæ or tribe Scincoidea. The tongue is not
extensile. The body and tail are covered with overlapping scales, and
the toes are margined. See Illust. under Skink.

Scin"iph (?), n. [L. scinifes, cinifes, or ciniphes, pl., Gr. &?;.]
Some kind of stinging or biting insect, as a flea, a gnat, a sandfly,
or the like. Ex. viii. 17 (Douay version).

Scink (?), n. (Zoöl.) A skink.

Scink (?), n. A slunk calf. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

||Scin*til"la (?), n. [L.] A spark; the least particle; an iota; a
||tittle. R. North.

Scin"til*lant (?), a. [L. scintillans, p. pr. of scintillare to
sparkle. See Scintillate.] Emitting sparks, or fine igneous particles;
sparkling. M. Green.

Scin"til*late (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scintillated (?); p. pr. & vb.
n. Scintillating.] [L. scintillare, scintillatum, from scintilla a
spark. Cf. Stencil.] 1. To emit sparks, or fine igneous particles.

    As the electrical globe only scintillates when rubbed against its
    cushion.


Sir W. Scott.

2. To sparkle, as the fixed stars.

Scin`til*la"tion (?), n. [L. scintillatio: cf. F. scintillation.] 1.
The act of scintillating.

2. A spark or flash emitted in scintillating.

    These scintillations are . . . the inflammable effluences
    discharged from the bodies collided.


Sir T. Browne.

Scin"til*lous (?), a. Scintillant. [R.]

Scin"til*lous*ly, adv. In a scintillant manner. [R.]

Sci*og"ra*phy (?), n. See Sciagraphy.

Sci"o*lism (?), n. [See Sciolist.] The knowledge of a sciolist;
superficial knowledge.

Sci"o*list (?), n. [L. sciolus. See Sciolous.] One who knows many
things superficially; a pretender to science; a smatterer.

    These passages in that book were enough to humble the presumption
    of our modern sciolists, if their pride were not as great as their
    ignorance.


Sir W. Temple.

    A master were lauded and sciolists shent.


R. Browning.

Sci`o*lis"tic (?), a. Of or pertaining to sciolism, or a sciolist;
partaking of sciolism; resembling a sciolist.

Sci"o*lous (?), a. [L. scilus, dim. of scius knowing, fr. scire to
know. See Science.] Knowing superficially or imperfectly. Howell.

Sci*om"a*chy (?), n. [Gr. &?;, &?;; &?; a shadow + &?; battle: cf. F.
sciomachie, sciamachie.] A fighting with a shadow; a mock contest; an
imaginary or futile combat. [Written also scimachy.] Cowley.

Sci"o*man`cy (?), n. [Gr. &?; a shadow + -mancy: cf. F. sciomance,
sciamancie.] Divination by means of shadows.

Sci"on (?), n. [OF. cion, F. scion, probably from scier to saw, fr. L.
secare to cut. Cf. Section.] 1. (Bot.) (a) A shoot or sprout of a
plant; a sucker. (b) A piece of a slender branch or twig cut for
grafting. [Formerly written also cion, and cyon.]

2. Hence, a descendant; an heir; as, a scion of a royal stock.

Sci*op"tic (?), a. [Gr. &?; shadow + &?; belonging to sight: cf. F.
scioptique. See Optic.] (Opt.) Of or pertaining to an optical
arrangement for forming images in a darkened room, usually called
scioptic ball.

Scioptic ball (Opt.), the lens of a camera obscura mounted in a wooden
ball which fits a socket in a window shutter so as to be readily
turned, like the eye, to different parts of the landscape.

Sci*op"ti*con (?), n. [NL. See Scioptic.] A kind of magic lantern.

Sci*op"tics (?), n. The art or process of exhibiting luminous images,
especially those of external objects, in a darkened room, by
arrangements of lenses or mirrors.

Sci*op"tric (?), a. (Opt.) Scioptic.

Sci"ot (?), a. Of or pertaining to the island Scio (Chio or Chios). --
n. A native or inhabitant of Scio. [Written also Chiot.]

Sci`o*ther"ic (?), a. [Cf. L. sciothericon a sundial. See Sciatheric.]
Of or pertaining to a sundial.

Sciotheric telescope (Dialing), an instrument consisting of a
horizontal dial, with a telescope attached to it, used for determining
the time, whether of day or night.

Sci"ous (?), a. [L. scius.] Knowing; having knowledge. "Brutes may be
and are scious." Coleridge.

||Sci`re fa"ci*as (s`r f"sh*s). [L., do you cause to know.] (Law) A
||judicial writ, founded upon some record, and requiring the party
||proceeded against to show cause why the party bringing it should not
||have advantage of such record, or (as in the case of scire facias to
||repeal letters patent) why the record should not be annulled or
||vacated. Wharton. Bouvier.

Scir"rhoid (skr"roid), a. [Scirrhus + -oid.] Resembling scirrhus.
Dunglison.

Scir*rhos"i*ty (skr*rs"*t), n. (Med.) A morbid induration, as of a
gland; state of being scirrhous.

Scir"rhous (skr"rs), a. [NL. scirrhosus.] (Med.) Proceeding from
scirrhus; of the nature of scirrhus; indurated; knotty; as, scirrhous
affections; scirrhous disease. [Written also skirrhous.]

Scir"rhus (?), n.; pl. L. Scirrhi (#), E. Scirrhuses (#). [NL., from L.
scirros, Gr. &?;, &?;, fr. &?;, &?;, hard.] (Med.) (a) An indurated
organ or part; especially, an indurated gland. [Obs.] (b) A cancerous
tumor which is hard, translucent, of a gray or bluish color, and emits
a creaking sound when incised. [Sometimes incorrectly written schirrus;
written also skirrhus.]

Scis`ci*ta"tion (?), n. [L. sciscitatio, fr. sciscitari to inquire,
from sciscere to seek to know, v. incho. from scire to know.] The act
of inquiring; inquiry; demand. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

Scise (?), v. i. [L. scindere, scissum, to cut, split.] To cut; to
penetrate. [Obs.]

    The wicked steel scised deep in his right side.


Fairfax.

Scis"sel (?), n. [Cf. Scissile.] 1. The clippings of metals made in
various mechanical operations.

2. The slips or plates of metal out of which circular blanks have been
cut for the purpose of coinage.

Scis"si*ble (?), a. [L. scindere, scissum, to split.] Capable of being
cut or divided by a sharp instrument. [R.] Bacon.

Scis"sil (?), n. See Scissel.

Scis"sile (?), a. [L. scissilis, fr. scindere, scissum, to cut, to
split: cf. F. scissile. See Schism.] Capable of being cut smoothly;
scissible. [R.] Arbuthnot.

Scis"sion (?), n. [L. scissio, fr. scindere, scissum, to cut, to split:
cf. F. scission.] The act of dividing with an instrument having a sharp
edge. Wiseman.

Scis`si*par"i*ty (?), n. [L. scissus (p. p. of scindere to split) +
parere to bring forth: cf. F. scissiparité.] (Biol.) Reproduction by
fission.

Scis"sor (?), v. t. To cut with scissors or shears; to prepare with the
aid of scissors. Massinger.

Scis"sors (?), n. pl. [OE. sisoures, OF. cisoires (cf. F. ciseaux),
probably fr. LL. cisorium a cutting instrument, fr. L. caedere to cut.
Cf. Chisel, Concise. The modern spelling is due to a mistaken
derivation from L. scissor one who cleaves or divides, fr. scindere,
scissum, to cut, split.] A cutting instrument resembling shears, but
smaller, consisting of two cutting blades with handles, movable on a
pin in the center, by which they are held together. Often called a pair
of scissors. [Formerly written also cisors, cizars, and scissars.]

Scissors grinder (Zoöl.), the European goatsucker. [Prov. Eng.]

Scis"sors*bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) See Skimmer.

Scis"sors*tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A tyrant flycatcher (Milvulus
forficatus) of the Southern United States and Mexico, which has a
deeply forked tail. It is light gray above, white beneath, salmon on
the flanks, and fiery red at the base of the crown feathers.

Scis"sors-tailed` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the outer feathers much the
longest, the others decreasing regularly to the median ones.

Scis"sure (?), n. [L. scissura, from scindere, scissum, to cut, split.]
A longitudinal opening in a body, made by cutting; a cleft; a fissure.
Hammond.

Scit`a*min"e*ous (?; 277), a. [NL. scitamineosus, fr. Scitamineae, fr.
L. scitamentum a delicacy, dainty.] (Bot.) Of or pertaining to a
natural order of plants (Scitamineæ), mostly tropical herbs, including
the ginger, Indian shot, banana, and the plants producing turmeric and
arrowroot.

Sci"u*rine (?; 277), a. [Cf. F. sciurien. See Sciurus.] (Zoöl.) Of or
pertaining to the Squirrel family. -- n. A rodent of the Squirrel
family.

Sci"u*roid (?), a. [Sciurus + -oid.] (Bot.) Resembling the tail of a
squirrel; -- generally said of branches which are close and dense, or
of spikes of grass like barley.

||Sci`u*ro*mor"pha (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. L. sciurus squirrel + Gr.
||morfh` form.] (Zoöl.) A tribe of rodents containing the squirrels and
||allied animals, such as the gophers, woodchucks, beavers, and others.

||Sci*u"rus (?), n. [L., a squirrel, Gr. &?;. See Squirrel.] (Zoöl.) A
||genus of rodents comprising the common squirrels.

Sclaun"dre (?), n. Slander. [Obs.] Chaucer.

{ Sclav (?), Sclave }, n. Same as Slav.

Sclav"ic (?), a. Same as Slavic.

Sclav"ism (?), n. Same as Slavism.

Scla*vo"nian (?), a. & n. Same as Slavonian.

Scla*von"ic (?), a. Same as Slavonic.

Sclen"der (?), a. Slender. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Scler"a*go`gy (?), n. [Gr. &?;; &?; hard + &?; a leading or training.]
Severe discipline. [Obs.] Bp. Hacket.

||Scle*re"ma (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. sklhro`s hard.] (Med.) Induration of
||the cellular tissue.

Sclerema of adults. See Scleroderma. -- ||Sclerema neonatorum (&?;)
[NL., of the newborn], an affection characterized by a peculiar
hardening and rigidity of the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues in the
newly born. It is usually fatal. Called also skinbound disease.

Scle*ren"chy*ma (?), n. [NL., from Gr. sklhro`s hard + -enchyma as in
parenchyma.] 1. (Bot.) Vegetable tissue composed of short cells with
thickened or hardened walls, as in nutshells and the gritty parts of a
pear. See Sclerotic.

By recent German writers and their English translators, this term is
used for liber cells. Goodale.

2. (Zoöl.) The hard calcareous deposit in the tissues of Anthozoa,
constituting the stony corals.

Scler`en*chym"a*tous (?), a. (Bot. & Zoöl.) Pertaining to, or composed
of, sclerenchyma.

Scle*ren"chyme (?), n. Sclerenchyma.

||Scle*ri"a*sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;.] (Med.) (a) A morbid
||induration of the edge of the eyelid. (b) Induration of any part,
||including scleroderma.

Scle"rite (skl"rt), n. (Zoöl.) A hard chitinous or calcareous process
or corpuscle, especially a spicule of the Alcyonaria.

||Scle*ri"tis (skl*r"ts), n. [NL.] See Sclerotitis.

Scler"o*base (? or ?), n. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + ba`sis base.] (Zoöl.)
The calcareous or hornlike coral forming the central stem or axis of
most compound alcyonarians; -- called also foot secretion. See Illust.
under Gorgoniacea, and Cœnenchyma. -- Scler`o*ba"sic (#), a.

Scler"o*derm (? or ?; 277), n. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + de`rma skin: cf. F.
scléroderme.] (a) (Zoöl.) One of a tribe of plectognath fishes
(Sclerodermi) having the skin covered with hard scales, or plates, as
the cowfish and the trunkfish. (b) One of the Sclerodermata. (c)
Hardened, or bony, integument of various animals.

||Scler`o*der"ma (?), n. [NL.] (Med.) A disease of adults,
||characterized by a diffuse rigidity and hardness of the skin.

||Scler`o*der"ma*ta (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) The stony corals; the
||Madreporaria.

{ Scler`o*der"mic (?), Scler`o*der"mous (?) }, (Zoöl.) (a) Having the
integument, or skin, hard, or covered with hard plates. (b) Of or
pertaining to the Sclerodermata.

Scler`o*der"mite (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The hard integument of Crustacea.
(b) Sclerenchyma.

Scler"o*gen (? or ?), n. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + -gen.] (Bot.) The
thickening matter of woody cells; lignin.

Scle*rog"e*nous (?), a. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + -genous.] (Anat.) Making
or secreting a hard substance; becoming hard.

Scle"roid (?), a. [Gr. &?;; sklhro`s hard + &?; form.] (Bot.) Having a
hard texture, as nutshells.

||Scle*ro"ma (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. sklhro`s hard + -oma.] (Med.)
||Induration of the tissues. See Sclerema, Scleroderma, and Sclerosis.

Scle*rom"e*ter (?), n. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + -meter.] An instrument for
determining with accuracy the degree of hardness of a mineral.

Scle*rosed" (?), a. Affected with sclerosis.

||Scle*ro"sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. (&?;&?;, fr. sklhro`s hard.] 1.
||(Med.) Induration; hardening; especially, that form of induration
||produced in an organ by increase of its interstitial connective
||tissue.

2. (Bot.) Hardening of the cell wall by lignification.

Cerebro-spinal sclerosis (Med.), an affection in which patches of
hardening, produced by increase of the neuroglia and atrophy of the
true nerve tissue, are found scattered throughout the brain and spinal
cord. It is associated with complete or partial paralysis, a peculiar
jerking tremor of the muscles, headache, and vertigo, and is usually
fatal. Called also multiple, disseminated, or insular, sclerosis.

Scle`ro*skel"e*ton (?), n. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + E. skeleton.] (Anat.)
That part of the skeleton which is developed in tendons, ligaments, and
aponeuroses.

Scle*ro"tal (?), a. (Anat.) Sclerotic. -- n. The optic capsule; the
sclerotic coat of the eye. Owen.

Scle*rot"ic (?), a. [Gr. sklhro`s hard: cf. F. sclérotique.] 1. Hard;
firm; indurated; -- applied especially in anatomy to the firm outer
coat of the eyeball, which is often cartilaginous and sometimes bony.

2. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sclerotic coat of the eye;
sclerotical.

3. (Med.) Affected with sclerosis; sclerosed.

Sclerotic parenchyma (Bot.), sclerenchyma. By some writers a
distinction is made, sclerotic parenchyma being applied to tissue
composed of cells with the walls hardened but not thickened, and
sclerenchyma to tissue composed of cells with the walls both hardened
and thickened.

Scle*rot"ic, n. [Cf. F. sclérotique.] (Anat.) The sclerotic coat of the
eye. See Illust. of Eye (d).

Scle*rot"ic, a. (Chem.) Pertaining to, or designating, an acid obtained
from ergot or the sclerotium of a fungus growing on rye.

Scle*rot"ic*al (?), a. (Anat.) Sclerotic.

||Scler`o*ti"tis (?), n. [NL. See Sclerotic, and -itis.] (Med.)
||Inflammation of the sclerotic coat.

||Scle*ro"ti*um (?), n.; pl. Sclerotia (#). [NL., fr. Gr. sklhro`s
||hard.] 1. (Bot.) A hardened body formed by certain fungi, as by the
||Claviceps purpurea, which produces ergot.

2. (Zoöl.) The mature or resting stage of a plasmodium.

Scler"o*tome (sklr"*tm or sklr"*tm), n. [Gr. sklhro`s hard + te`mnein
to cut.] (Zoöl.) One of the bony, cartilaginous, or membranous
partitions which separate the myotomes. -- Scler`o*tom"ic (#), a.

Scle"rous (?), a. [Gr. &?;.] (Anat.) Hard; indurated; sclerotic.

Scoat (?), v. t. To prop; to scotch. [Prov. Eng.]

Scob"by (?), n. The chaffinch. [Prov. Eng.]

Scob"i*form (?), a. [L. scobs, or scobis, sawdust, scrapings + -form:
cf. F. scobiforme.] Having the form of, or resembling, sawdust or
raspings.

Scobs, n. sing. & pl. [L. scobs, or scobis, fr. scabere to scrape.] 1.
Raspings of ivory, hartshorn, metals, or other hard substance.
Chambers.

2. The dross of metals.

Scoff (?; 115), n. [OE. scof; akin to OFries. schof, OHG. scoph, Icel.
skaup, and perh. to E. shove.] 1. Derision; ridicule; mockery; derisive
or mocking expression of scorn, contempt, or reproach.

    With scoffs, and scorns, and contumelious taunts.


Shak.

2. An object of scorn, mockery, or derision.

    The scoff of withered age and beardless youth.


Cowper.

Scoff, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scoffed (?; 115); p. pr. & vb. n. Scoffing.]
[Cf. Dan. skuffe to deceive, delude, Icel. skopa to scoff, OD.
schoppen. See Scoff, n.] To show insolent ridicule or mockery; to
manifest contempt by derisive acts or language; -- often with at.

    Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway, And fools who came
    to scoff, remained to pray.


Goldsmith.

    God's better gift they scoff at and refuse.


Cowper.

Syn. -- To sneer; mock; gibe; jeer. See Sneer.

Scoff, v. t. To treat or address with derision; to assail scornfully;
to mock at.

    To scoff religion is ridiculously proud and immodest.


Glanvill.

Scoff"er (?), n. One who scoffs. 2 Pet. iii. 3.

Scoff"er*y (?), n. The act of scoffing; scoffing conduct; mockery.
Holinshed.

Scoff"ing*ly, adv. In a scoffing manner. Broome.

Scoke (?), n. (Bot.) Poke (Phytolacca decandra).

Sco*lay" (?), v. i. See Scoley. [Obs.]

Scold (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scolded; p. pr. & vb. n. Scolding.]
[Akin to D. schelden, G. schelten, OHG. sceltan, Dan. skielde.] To find
fault or rail with rude clamor; to brawl; to utter harsh, rude,
boisterous rebuke; to chide sharply or coarsely; -- often with at; as,
to scold at a servant.

    Pardon me, lords, 't is the first time ever I was forced to scold.


Shak.

Scold, v. t. To chide with rudeness and clamor; to rate; also, to
rebuke or reprove with severity.

Scold, n. 1. One who scolds, or makes a practice of scolding; esp., a
rude, clamorous woman; a shrew.

    She is an irksome, brawling scold.


Shak.

2. A scolding; a brawl.

Scold"er (?), n. 1. One who scolds.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The oyster catcher; -- so called from its shrill cries.
(b) The old squaw. [Local U.S.]

Scold"ing, a. & n. from Scold, v.

Scolding bridle, an iron frame. See Brank, n., 2.

Scold"ing*ly, adv. In a scolding manner.

Scole (?), n. School. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||Sco*le"ci*da (? or ?), n. pl. [NL. See Scolex.] (Zoöl.) Same as
||Helminthes.

Scol"e*cite (? or ?; 277), n. [Gr. skw`lhx, -hkos, a worm, earthworm.]
(Min.) A zeolitic mineral occuring in delicate radiating groups of
white crystals. It is a hydrous silicate of alumina and lime. Called
also lime mesotype.

||Sco*le`co*mor"pha (&?;), n. pl. [NL. See Scolex, -morphous.] (Zoöl.)
||Same as Scolecida.

||Sco"lex (?), n.; pl. Scoleces (#). [NL., from Gr. skw`lhx worm,
||grub.] (Zoöl.) (a) The embryo produced directly from the egg in a
||metagenetic series, especially the larva of a tapeworm or other
||parasitic worm. See Illust. of Echinococcus. (b) One of the
||Scolecida.

Sco*ley" (?), v. i. [Cf. OF. escoler to teach. See School.] To go to
school; to study. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||Sco`li*o"sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. skolio`s crooked.] (Med.) A
||lateral curvature of the spine.

||Scol"i*thus (? or ?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. skw`lhx a worm + li`qos a
||stone.] (Paleon.) A tubular structure found in Potsdam sandstone, and
||believed to be the fossil burrow of a marine worm.

Scol"lop (?), n. & v. See Scallop.

Scol`o*pa"cine (?), a. [L. scolopax a snipe, Gr. &?;.] (Zoöl.) Of or
pertaining to the Scolopacidæ, or Snipe family.

||Scol`o*pen"dra (?), n. [L., a kind of multiped, fr. Gr. &?;.] 1.
||(Zoöl.) A genus of venomous myriapods including the centipeds. See
||Centiped.

2. A sea fish. [R.] Spenser.

Scol`o*pen"drine (?), a. (Zoöl.) Like or pertaining to the Scolopendra.

Scol"y*tid (?), n. [Gr. &?; to cut short.] (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous
species of small bark-boring beetles of the genus Scolytus and allied
genera. Also used adjectively.

||Scom"ber (?), n. [L., a mackerel, Gr. &?;.] (Zoöl.) A genus of
||acanthopterygious fishes which includes the common mackerel.

Scom"ber*oid (?), a. & n. [Cf. F. scombéroïde.] (Zoöl.) Same as
Scombroid.

||Scom`bri*for"mes (skm`br*fôr"mz), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A division of
||fishes including the mackerels, tunnies, and allied fishes.

Scom"broid (skm"broid), a. [Scomber + -oid.] (Zoöl.) Like or pertaining
to the Mackerel family. -- n. Any fish of the family Scombridæ, of
which the mackerel (Scomber) is the type.

Scom"fish (skm"fsh or skm"- ), v. t. & i. To suffocate or stifle; to
smother. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

Scom"fit (skm"fy), n. & v. Discomfit. [Obs.]

Scomm (skm), n. [L. scomma a taunt, jeer, scoff, Gr. &?;, fr. &?; to
mock, scoff at.] 1. A buffoon. [Obs.] L'Estrange.

2. A flout; a jeer; a gibe; a taunt. [Obs.] Fotherby.

Sconce (?), n. [D. schans, OD. schantse, perhaps from OF. esconse a
hiding place, akin to esconser to hide, L. absconsus, p. p. of
abscondere. See Abscond, and cf. Ensconce, Sconce a candlestick.] 1. A
fortification, or work for defense; a fort.

    No sconce or fortress of his raising was ever known either to have
    been forced, or yielded up, or quitted.


Milton.

2. A hut for protection and shelter; a stall.

    One that . . . must raise a sconce by the highway and sell
    switches.


Beau. & Fl.

3. A piece of armor for the head; headpiece; helmet.

    I must get a sconce for my head.


Shak.

4. Fig.: The head; the skull; also, brains; sense; discretion.
[Colloq.]

    To knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel.


Shak.

5. A poll tax; a mulct or fine. Johnson.

6. [OF. esconse a dark lantern, properly, a hiding place. See Etymol.
above.] A protection for a light; a lantern or cased support for a
candle; hence, a fixed hanging or projecting candlestick.

    Tapers put into lanterns or sconces of several- colored, oiled
    paper, that the wind might not annoy them.


Evelyn.

    Golden sconces hang not on the walls.


Dryden.

7. Hence, the circular tube, with a brim, in a candlestick, into which
the candle is inserted.

8. (Arch.) A squinch.

9. A fragment of a floe of ice. Kane.

10. [Perhaps a different word.] A fixed seat or shelf. [Prov. Eng.]

Sconce, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sconced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sconcing.] 1.
To shut up in a sconce; to imprison; to insconce. [Obs.]

    Immure him, sconce him, barricade him in 't.


Marston.

2. To mulct; to fine. [Obs.] Milton.

Scon"cheon (?), n. (Arch.) A squinch.

Scone (?), n. A cake, thinner than a bannock, made of wheat or barley
or oat meal. [Written variously, scon, skone, skon, etc.] [Scot.]
Burns.

Scoop (?), n. [OE. scope, of Scand. origin; cf. Sw. skopa, akin to D.
schop a shovel, G. schüppe, and also to E. shove. See Shovel.] 1. A
large ladle; a vessel with a long handle, used for dipping liquids; a
utensil for bailing boats.

2. A deep shovel, or any similar implement for digging out and dipping
or shoveling up anything; as, a flour scoop; the scoop of a dredging
machine.

3. (Surg.) A spoon-shaped instrument, used in extracting certain
substances or foreign bodies.

4. A place hollowed out; a basinlike cavity; a hollow.

    Some had lain in the scoop of the rock.


J. R. Drake.

5. A sweep; a stroke; a swoop.

6. The act of scooping, or taking with a scoop or ladle; a motion with
a scoop, as in dipping or shoveling.

Scoop net, a kind of hand net, used in fishing; also, a net for
sweeping the bottom of a river. -- Scoop wheel, a wheel for raising
water, having scoops or buckets attached to its circumference; a
tympanum.

Scoop, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scooped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scooping.] [OE.
scopen. See Scoop, n.] 1. To take out or up with, a scoop; to lade out.

    He scooped the water from the crystal flood.


Dryden.

2. To empty by lading; as, to scoop a well dry.

3. To make hollow, as a scoop or dish; to excavate; to dig out; to form
by digging or excavation.

    Those carbuncles the Indians will scoop, so as to hold above a
    pint.


Arbuthnot.

Scoop"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, scoops.

2. (Zoöl.) The avocet; -- so called because it scoops up the mud to
obtain food.

Scoot (?), v. i. To walk fast; to go quickly; to run hastily away.
[Colloq. & Humorous, U. S.]

Sco"pa*rin (?), n. (Chem.) A yellow gelatinous or crystalline substance
found in broom (Cytisus scoparius) accompanying sparteïne.

Sco"pate (?), a. [L. scopae, scopa, a broom.] (Zoöl.) Having the
surface closely covered with hairs, like a brush.

-scope (&?;). [Gr. skopo`s a watcher, spy. See Scope.] A combining form
usually signifying an instrument for viewing (with the eye) or
observing (in any way); as in microscope, telescope, altoscope,
anemoscope.

Scope (?), n. [It. scopo, L. scopos a mark, aim, Gr. skopo`s, a
watcher, mark, aim; akin to &?;, &?; to view, and perh. to E. spy. Cf.
Skeptic, Bishop.] 1. That at which one aims; the thing or end to which
the mind directs its view; that which is purposed to be reached or
accomplished; hence, ultimate design, aim, or purpose; intention;
drift; object. "Shooting wide, do miss the marked scope." Spenser.

    Your scope is as mine own, So to enforce or qualify the laws As to
    your soul seems good.


Shak.

    The scope of all their pleading against man's authority, is to
    overthrow such laws and constitutions in the church.


Hooker.

2. Room or opportunity for free outlook or aim; space for action;
amplitude of opportunity; free course or vent; liberty; range of view,
intent, or action.

    Give him line and scope.


Shak.

    In the fate and fortunes of the human race, scope is given to the
    operation of laws which man must always fail to discern the reasons
    of.


I. Taylor.

    Excuse me if I have given too much scope to the reflections which
    have arisen in my mind.


Burke.

    An intellectual cultivation of no moderate depth or scope.


Hawthorne.

3. Extended area. [Obs.] "The scopes of land granted to the first
adventurers." Sir J. Davies.

4. Length; extent; sweep; as, scope of cable.

Sco"pe*line (?), a. (Zoöl.) Scopeloid.

Sco"pe*loid (?), a. [NL. Scopelus, typical genus (fr. Gr. &?; a
headland) + - oid.] (Zoöl.) Like or pertaining to fishes of the genus
Scopelus, or family Scopelodæ, which includes many small oceanic
fishes, most of which are phosphorescent. -- n. (Zoöl.) Any fish of the
family Scopelidæ.

Sco*pif"er*ous (?), a. [L. scopae, scopa + -ferous.] (Zoöl.) Bearing a
tuft of brushlike hairs.

Sco"pi*form (?), a. [L. scopae, scopa, a broom + -form.] Having the
form of a broom or besom. "Zeolite, stelliform or scopiform." Kirwan.

Sco"pi*ped (?; 277), n. [L. scopae, scopa, a broom + pes, pedis, a
foot.] (Zoöl.) Same as Scopuliped.

Scop"pet (?), v. t. [From Scoop, v. t.] To lade or dip out. [Obs.] Bp.
Hall.

Scops" owl` (?). [NL. scops, fr. Gr. &?; the little horned owl.]
(Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of small owls of the genus Scops
having ear tufts like those of the horned owls, especially the European
scops owl (Scops giu), and the American screech owl (S. asio).

{ Scop"tic (?), Scop"tic*al (?) }, a. [Gr. skwptiko`s, from skw`ptein
to mock, to scoff at.] Jesting; jeering; scoffing. [Obs.] South.

-- Scop"tic*al*ly, adv. [Obs.]

||Scop"u*la (?), n.; pl. E. Scopulas (#), L. Scopulæ (#). [L. scopulae,
||pl. a little broom.] (Zoöl.) (a) A peculiar brushlike organ found on
||the foot of spiders and used in the construction of the web. (b) A
||special tuft of hairs on the leg of a bee.

Scop"u*li*ped (?), n. [L. scopulae, pl., a little broom (fr. scopae a
broom) + pes, pedis, foot.] (Zoöl.) Any species of bee which has on the
hind legs a brush of hairs used for collecting pollen, as the hive bees
and bumblebees.

Scop"u*lous (?), a. [L. scopulosus, fr. scopulus a rock, Gr. &?;.] Full
of rocks; rocky. [Obs.]

Scor"bute (?), n. [LL. scorbutus: cf. F. scorbut. See Scurvy, n.]
Scurvy. [Obs.] Purchas.

{ Scor*bu"tic (?), Scor*bu"tic*al (?) }, a. [Cf. F. scorbutique.]
(Med.) Of or pertaining to scurvy; of the nature of, or resembling,
scurvy; diseased with scurvy; as, a scorbutic person; scorbutic
complaints or symptoms. -- Scor*bu"tic*al*ly, adv.

||Scor*bu"tus (?), n. [LL. See Scorbute.] (Med.) Scurvy.

Scorce (?), n. Barter. [Obs.] See Scorse.

Scorch (skôrch), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scorched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scorching.] [OE. scorchen, probably akin to scorcnen; cf. Norw.
skrokken shrunk up, skrekka, skrökka, to shrink, to become wrinkled up,
dial. Sw. skråkkla to wrinkle (see Shrug); but perhaps influenced by
OF. escorchier to strip the bark from, to flay, to skin, F. écorcher,
LL. excorticare; L. ex from + cortex, -icis, bark (cf. Cork); because
the skin falls off when scorched.] 1. To burn superficially; to parch,
or shrivel, the surface of, by heat; to subject to so much heat as
changes color and texture without consuming; as, to scorch linen.

    Summer drouth or singèd air Never scorch thy tresses fair.


Milton.

2. To affect painfully with heat, or as with heat; to dry up with heat;
to affect as by heat.

    Lashed by mad rage, and scorched by brutal fires.


Prior.

3. To burn; to destroy by, or as by, fire.

    Power was given unto him to scorch men with fire.


Rev. xvi. 8.

    The fire that scorches me to death.


Dryden.

Scorch, v. i. 1. To be burnt on the surface; to be parched; to be dried
up.

    Scatter a little mungy straw or fern amongst your seedlings, to
    prevent the roots from scorching.


Mortimer.

2. To burn or be burnt.

    He laid his long forefinger on the scarlet letter, which forthwith
    seemed to scorch into Hester's breast, as if it had been red hot.


Hawthorne.

Scorch"ing, a. Burning; parching or shriveling with heat. --
Scorch"ing*ly, adv. -- Scorch"ing*ness, n.

Score (skr), n. [AS. scor twenty, fr. sceran, scieran, to shear, cut,
divide; or rather the kindred Icel. skor incision, twenty, akin to Dan.
skure a notch, Sw. skåra. See Shear.] 1. A notch or incision;
especially, one that is made as a tally mark; hence, a mark, or line,
made for the purpose of account.

    Whereas, before, our forefathers had no other books but the score
    and the tally, thou hast caused printing to be used.


Shak.

2. An account or reckoning; account of dues; bill; hence, indebtedness.

    He parted well, and paid his score.


Shak.

3. Account; reason; motive; sake; behalf.

    But left the trade, as many more Have lately done on the same
    score.


Hudibras.

    You act your kindness in Cydaria's score.


Dryden.

4. The number twenty, as being marked off by a special score or tally;
hence, in pl., a large number.

    Amongst three or four score hogsheads.


Shak.

    At length the queen took upon herself to grant patents of monopoly
    by scores.


Macaulay.

5. A distance of twenty yards; -- a term used in ancient archery and
gunnery. Halliwell.

6. A weight of twenty pounds. [Prov. Eng.]

7. The number of points gained by the contestants, or either of them,
in any game, as in cards or cricket.

8. A line drawn; a groove or furrow.

9. (Mus.) The original and entire draught, or its transcript, of a
composition, with the parts for all the different instruments or voices
written on staves one above another, so that they can be read at a
glance; -- so called from the bar, which, in its early use, was drawn
through all the parts. Moore (Encyc. of Music).

In score (Mus.), having all the parts arranged and placed in
juxtaposition. Smart. -- To quit scores, to settle or balance accounts;
to render an equivalent; to make compensation.

    Does not the earth quit scores with all the elements in the noble
    fruits that issue from it?


South.

Score (skr), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scored (skrd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scoring.] 1. To mark with lines, scratches, or notches; to cut notches
or furrows in; to notch; to scratch; to furrow; as, to score timber for
hewing; to score the back with a lash.

    Let us score their backs.


Shak.

    A briar in that tangled wilderness Had scored her white right hand.


M. Arnold.

2. Especially, to mark with significant lines or notches, for
indicating or keeping account of something; as, to score a tally.

3. To mark or signify by lines or notches; to keep record or account
of; to set down; to record; to charge.

    Madam, I know when, Instead of five, you scored me ten.


Swift.

    Nor need I tallies thy dear love to score.


Shak.

4. To engrave, as upon a shield. [R.] Spenser.

5. To make a score of, as points, runs, etc., in a game.

6. (Mus.) To write down in proper order and arrangement; as, to score
an overture for an orchestra. See Score, n., 9.

7. (Geol.) To mark with parallel lines or scratches; as, the rocks of
New England and the Western States were scored in the drift epoch.

Scor"er (?), n. One who, or that which, scores.

||Sco"ri*a (?), n.; pl. Scoriæ (#). [L., fr. Gr. &?;, fr. &?; dung,
||ordure.] 1. The recrement of metals in fusion, or the slag rejected
||after the reduction of metallic ores; dross.

2. Cellular slaggy lava; volcanic cinders.

Sco"ri*ac (?), a. Scoriaceous. E. A. Poe.

Sco`ri*a"ceous (?), a. [Cf. F. scoriacé.] Of or pertaining to scoria;
like scoria or the recrement of metals; partaking of the nature of
scoria.

Sco"rie (?), n. (Zoöl.) The young of any gull. [Written also scaurie.]
[Prov. Eng.]

Sco`ri*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. scorification. See Scorify.] (Chem.)
The act, process, or result of scorifying, or reducing to a slag;
hence, the separation from earthy matter by means of a slag; as, the
scorification of ores.

Sco"ri*fi`er (?), n. (Chem.) One who, or that which, scorifies;
specifically, a small flat bowl-shaped cup used in the first heating in
assaying, to remove the earth and gangue, and to concentrate the gold
and silver in a lead button.

Sco"ri*form (?), a. In the form of scoria.

Sco"ri*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scorified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scorifying (?).] [Scoria + -fy: cf. F. scorifier.] (Chem.) To reduce to
scoria or slag; specifically, in assaying, to fuse so as to separate
the gangue and earthy material, with borax, lead, soda, etc., thus
leaving the gold and silver in a lead button; hence, to separate from,
or by means of, a slag.

Sco"ri*ous (?), a. Scoriaceous. Sir T. Browne.

Scorn (skôrn), n. [OE. scorn, scarn, scharn, OF. escarn, escharn,
eschar, of German origin; cf. OHG. skern mockery, skernn to mock; but
cf. also OF. escorner to mock.] 1. Extreme and lofty contempt; haughty
disregard; that disdain which springs from the opinion of the utter
meanness and unworthiness of an object.

    Scorn at first makes after love the more.


Shak.

    And wandered backward as in scorn, To wait an æon to be born.


Emerson.

2. An act or expression of extreme contempt.

    Every sullen frown and bitter scorn But fanned the fuel that too
    fast did burn.


Dryden.

3. An object of extreme disdain, contempt, or derision.

    Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and a derision
    to them that are round about us.


Ps. xliv. 13.

To think scorn, to regard as worthy of scorn or contempt; to disdain.
"He thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone." Esther iii. 6. -- To
laugh to scorn, to deride; to make a mock of; to ridicule as
contemptible.

Syn. -- Contempt; disdain; derision; contumely; despite; slight;
dishonor; mockery.

Scorn, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scorned (skôrnd); p. pr. & vb. n. Scoring.]
[OE. scornen, scarnen, schornen, OF. escarnir, escharnir. See Scorn,
n.] 1. To hold in extreme contempt; to reject as unworthy of regard; to
despise; to contemn; to disdain.

    I scorn thy meat; 't would choke me.


Shak.

    This my long sufferance, and my day of grace, Those who neglect and
    scorn shall never taste.


Milton.

    We scorn what is in itself contemptible or disgraceful.


C. J. Smith.

2. To treat with extreme contempt; to make the object of insult; to
mock; to scoff at; to deride.

    His fellow, that lay by his bed's side, Gan for to laugh, and
    scorned him full fast.


Chaucer.

    To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously.


Shak.

Syn. -- To contemn; despise; disdain. See Contemn.

Scorn (skôrn), v. i. To scoff; to mock; to show contumely, derision, or
reproach; to act disdainfully.

    He said mine eyes were black and my hair black, And, now I am
    remembered, scorned at me.


Shak.

Scorn"er (?), n. One who scorns; a despiser; a contemner; specifically,
a scoffer at religion. "Great scorners of death." Spenser.

    Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the
    lowly.


Prov. iii. 34.

Scorn"ful (?), a. 1. Full of scorn or contempt; contemptuous;
disdainful.

    Scornful of winter's frost and summer's sun.


Prior.

    Dart not scornful glances from those eyes.


Shak.

2. Treated with scorn; exciting scorn. [Obs.]

    The scornful mark of every open eye.


Shak.

Syn. -- Contemptuous; disdainful; contumelious; reproachful; insolent.

-- Scorn"ful*ly, adv. -- Scorn"ful*ness, n.

Scorn"y (?), a. Deserving scorn; paltry. [Obs.]

Scor"o*dite (?), n. [G. scorodit; -- so called in allusion to its smell
under the blowpipe, from Gr. &?; garlic.] (Min.) A leek-green or
brownish mineral occurring in orthorhombic crystals. It is a hydrous
arseniate of iron. [Written also skorodite.]

Scor*pæ"noid (?), a. [NL. Scorpaena, a typical genus (see Scorpene) + -
oid.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the family Scorpænidæ, which includes
the scorpene, the rosefish, the California rockfishes, and many other
food fishes. [Written also scorpænid.] See Illust. under Rockfish.

Scor"pene (?), n. [F. scorpène, fr. L. scorpaena a kind of fish, Gr.
&?;.] (Zoöl.) A marine food fish of the genus Scorpæna, as the European
hogfish (S. scrofa), and the California species (S. guttata).

Scor"per (?), n. Same as Scauper.

||Scor"pi*o (?), n.; pl. Scorpiones (#). [L.] 1. (Zoöl.) A scorpion.

2. (Astron.) (a) The eighth sign of the zodiac, which the sun enters
about the twenty-third day of October, marked thus [] in almanacs. (b)
A constellation of the zodiac containing the bright star Antares. It is
drawn on the celestial globe in the figure of a scorpion.

||Scor`pi*o"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) Same as Scorpiones.

{ Scor"pi*oid (?), Scor`pi*oid"al (?) }, a. [Gr. &?;; &?; a scorpion +
&?; form.] 1. Having the inflorescence curved or circinate at the end,
like a scorpion's tail.

Scor"pi*on (?), n. [F., fr. L. scorpio, scorpius, Gr. &?;, perhaps akin
to E. sharp.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of pulmonate
arachnids of the order Scorpiones, having a suctorial mouth, large
claw-bearing palpi, and a caudal sting.

Scorpions have a flattened body, and a long, slender post- abdomen
formed of six movable segments, the last of which terminates in a
curved venomous sting. The venom causes great pain, but is unattended
either with redness or swelling, except in the axillary or inguinal
glands, when an extremity is affected. It is seldom if ever destructive
of life. Scorpions are found widely dispersed in the warm climates of
both the Old and New Worlds.

2. (Zoöl.) The pine or gray lizard (Sceloporus undulatus). [Local, U.
S.]

3. (Zoöl.) The scorpene.

4. (Script.) A painful scourge.

    My father hath chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you
    with scorpions.


1 Kings xii. 11.

5. (Astron.) A sign and constellation. See Scorpio.

6. (Antiq.) An ancient military engine for hurling stones and other
missiles.

Book scorpion. (Zoöl.) See under Book. -- False scorpion. (Zoöl.) See
under False, and Book scorpion. -- Scorpion bug, or Water scorpion
(Zoöl.) See Nepa. -- Scorpion fly (Zoöl.), a neuropterous insect of the
genus Panorpa. See Panorpid. -- Scorpion grass (Bot.), a plant of the
genus Myosotis. M. palustris is the forget-me-not. -- Scorpion senna
(Bot.), a yellow-flowered leguminous shrub (Coronilla Emerus) having a
slender joined pod, like a scorpion's tail. The leaves are said to
yield a dye like indigo, and to be used sometimes to adulterate senna.
-- Scorpion shell (Zoöl.), any shell of the genus Pteroceras. See
Pteroceras. -- Scorpion spiders. (Zoöl.), any one of the Pedipalpi. --
Scorpion's tail (Bot.), any plant of the leguminous genus Scorpiurus,
herbs with a circinately coiled pod; -- also called caterpillar. --
Scorpion's thorn (Bot.), a thorny leguminous plant (Genista Scorpius)
of Southern Europe. -- The Scorpion's Heart (Astron.), the star Antares
in the constellation Scorpio.

||Scor`pi*o"nes (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A division of arachnids
||comprising the scorpions.

||Scor`pi*o*nid"e*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) Same as Scorpiones.

Scor"pi*on*wort` (?), n. (Bot.) A leguminous plant (Ornithopus
scorpioides) of Southern Europe, having slender curved pods.

Scorse (? or ?), n. [Cf. It. scorsa a course, and E. discourse.]
Barter; exchange; trade. [Obs.]

    And recompensed them with a better scorse.


Spenser.

Scorse, v. t. [Written also scourse, and scoss.] 1. To barter or
exchange. [Obs.] Spenser.

2. To chase. [Obs.] Spenser.

Scorse, v. i. To deal for the purchase of anything; to practice barter.
[Obs.] B. Jonson.

Scor"ta*to*ry (?), a. [L. scortator a fornicator, from scortari to
fornicate, scortum a prostitute.] Pertaining to lewdness or
fornication; lewd.

Scot (?), n. A name for a horse. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Scot, n. [Cf. L. Skoti, pl., AS. Scotta, pl. Skottas, Sceottas.] A
native or inhabitant of Scotland; a Scotsman, or Scotchman.

Scot, n. [Icel. skot; or OF. escot, F. écot, LL. scottum, scotum, from
a kindred German word; akin to AS. scot, and E. shot, shoot; cf. AS.
sceótan to shoot, to contribute. See Shoot, and cf. Shot.] A portion of
money assessed or paid; a tax or contribution; a mulct; a fine; a shot.

Scot and lot, formerly, a parish assessment laid on subjects according
to their ability. [Eng.] Cowell. Now, a phrase for obligations of every
kind regarded collectivelly.

    Experienced men of the world know very well that it is best to pay
    scot and lot as they go along.


Emerson.

{ Scot"al (?), Scot"ale (?) }, n. [Scot + ale.] (O. Eng. Law) The
keeping of an alehouse by an officer of a forest, and drawing people to
spend their money for liquor, for fear of his displeasure.

Scotch (?), a. [Cf. Scottish.] Of or pertaining to Scotland, its
language, or its inhabitants; Scottish.

Scotch broom (Bot.), the Cytisus scoparius. See Broom. -- Scotch
dipper, or Scotch duck (Zoöl.), the bufflehead; -- called also Scotch
teal, and Scotchman. -- Scotch fiddle, the itch. [Low] Sir W. Scott. --
Scotch mist, a coarse, dense mist, like fine rain. -- Scotch
nightingale (Zoöl.), the sedge warbler. [Prov. Eng.] -- Scotch pebble.
See under pebble. -- Scotch pine (Bot.) See Riga fir. -- Scotch thistle
(Bot.), a species of thistle (Onopordon acanthium); -- so called from
its being the national emblem of the Scotch.

Scotch, n. 1. The dialect or dialects of English spoken by the people
of Scotland.

2. Collectively, the people of Scotland.

Scotch, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scotched (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scotching.]
[Cf. Prov. E. scote a prop, and Walloon ascot a prop, ascoter to prop,
F. accoter, also Armor. skoaz the shoulder, skoazia to shoulder up, to
prop, to support, W. ysgwydd a shoulder, ysgwyddo to shoulder. Cf.
Scoat.] [Written also scoatch, scoat.] To shoulder up; to prop or block
with a wedge, chock, etc., as a wheel, to prevent its rolling or
slipping.

Scotch, n. A chock, wedge, prop, or other support, to prevent slipping;
as, a scotch for a wheel or a log on inclined ground.

Scotch, v. t. [Probably the same word as scutch; cf. Norw. skoka,
skoko, a swingle for flax; perhaps akin to E. shake.] To cut
superficially; to wound; to score.

    We have scotched the snake, not killed it.


Shak.

Scotched collops (Cookery), a dish made of pieces of beef or veal cut
thin, or minced, beaten flat, and stewed with onion and other
condiments; -- called also Scotch collops. [Written also scotcht
collops.]

Scotch, n. A slight cut or incision; a score. Walton.

Scotch"-hop`per (?), n. Hopscotch.

Scotch"ing, n. (Masonry) Dressing stone with a pick or pointed
instrument.

Scotch"man (?), n.; pl. Scotchmen (&?;). 1. A native or inhabitant of
Scotland; a Scot; a Scotsman.

2. (Naut.) A piece of wood or stiff hide placed over shrouds and other
rigging to prevent chafe by the running gear. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

Sco"ter (?), n. [Cf. Prov. E. scote to plow up.] (Zoöl.) Any one of
several species of northern sea ducks of the genus Oidemia.

The European scoters are Oidemia nigra, called also black duck, black
diver, surf duck; and the velvet, or double, scoter (O. fusca). The
common American species are the velvet, or white-winged, scoter (O.
Deglandi), called also velvet duck, white-wing, bull coot, white-winged
coot; the black scoter (O. Americana), called also black coot,
butterbill, coppernose; and the surf scoter, or surf duck (O.
perspicillata), called also baldpate, skunkhead, horsehead, patchhead,
pishaug, and spectacled coot. These birds are collectively called also
coots. The females and young are called gray coots, and brown coots.

Scot"-free" [?], a. Free from payment of scot; untaxed; hence, unhurt;
clear; safe.

    Do as much for this purpose, and thou shalt pass scot-free.


Sir W. Scott.

    Then young Hay escaped scot-free to Holland.


A. Lang.

Scoth (?), v. t. To clothe or cover up. [Obs.]

||Sco"ti*a (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. skoti`a darkness, a sunken molding in
||the base of a pillar, so called from the dark shadow it casts, from
||sko`tos darkness.] (Arch.) A concave molding used especially in
||classical architecture.

Sco"ti*a, n. [L.] Scotland [Poetic]

    O Scotia! my dear, my native soil!


Burns.

Sco"tist (?), n. (Eccl. Hist.) A follower of (Joannes) Duns Scotus, the
Franciscan scholastic (d. 1308), who maintained certain doctrines in
philosophy and theology, in opposition to the Thomists, or followers of
Thomas Aquinas, the Dominican scholastic.

Scot"o*graph (?), n. [Gr. sko`tos darkness + -graph.] An instrument for
writing in the dark, or without seeing. Maunder.

||Sco*to"ma (?), n. [L.] (Med.) Scotomy.

Scot"o*my (?), n. [NL. scotomia, from Gr. &?; dizziness, fr. &?; to
darken, fr. sko`tos darkness: cf. F. scotomie.] 1. Dizziness with
dimness of sight. [Obs.] Massinger.

2. (Med.) Obscuration of the field of vision due to the appearance of a
dark spot before the eye.

Sco"to*scope (? or ?), n. [Gr. sko`tos darkness + -scope.] An
instrument that discloses objects in the dark or in a faint light.
[Obs.] Pepys.

Scots (?), a. [For older Scottis Scottish. See Scottish.] Of or
pertaining to the Scotch; Scotch; Scottish; as, Scots law; a pound
Scots (1s. 8d.).

Scots"man (-man), n. See Scotchman.

Scot"ter*ing (?), n. The burning of a wad of pease straw at the end of
harvest. [Prov. Eng.]

Scot"ti*cism (?), n. An idiom, or mode of expression, peculiar to
Scotland or Scotchmen.

    That, in short, in which the Scotticism of Scotsmen most intimately
    consists, is the habit of emphasis.


Masson.

Scot"ti*cize (?), v. t. To cause to become like the Scotch; to make
Scottish. [R.]

Scot"tish (?), a. [From Scot a Scotchman: cf. AS. Scyttisc, and E.
Scotch, a., Scots, a.] Of or pertaining to the inhabitants of Scotland,
their country, or their language; as, Scottish industry or economy; a
Scottish chief; a Scottish dialect.

Scoun"drel (?), n. [Probably from Prov. E. & Scotch scunner, scouner,
to loathe, to disgust, akin to AS. scunian to shun. See Shun.] A mean,
worthless fellow; a rascal; a villain; a man without honor or virtue.

    Go, if your ancient, but ignoble blood Has crept through scoundrels
    ever since the flood.


Pope.

Scoun"drel, a. Low; base; mean; unprincipled.

Scoun"drel*dom (?), n. The domain or sphere of scoundrels; scoundrels,
collectively; the state, ideas, or practices of scoundrels. Carlyle.

Scoun"drel*ism (?), n. The practices or conduct of a scoundrel;
baseness; rascality. Cotgrave.

Scour (skour), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scoured (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scouring.] [Akin to LG. schüren, D. schuren, schueren, G. scheuern,
Dan. skure; Sw. skura; all possibly fr. LL. escurare, fr. L. ex +
curare to take care. Cf. Cure.] 1. To rub hard with something rough, as
sand or Bristol brick, especially for the purpose of cleaning; to clean
by friction; to make clean or bright; to cleanse from grease, dirt,
etc., as articles of dress.

2. To purge; as, to scour a horse.

3. To remove by rubbing or cleansing; to sweep along or off; to carry
away or remove, as by a current of water; -- often with off or away.

    [I will] stain my favors in a bloody mask, Which, washed away,
    shall scour my shame with it.


Shak.

4. [Perhaps a different word; cf. OF. escorre, escourre, It. scorrere,
both fr. L. excurrere to run forth. Cf. Excursion.] To pass swiftly
over; to brush along; to traverse or search thoroughly; as, to scour
the coast.

    Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain.


Pope.

Scouring barrel, a tumbling barrel. See under Tumbling. -- Scouring
cinder (Metal.), a basic slag, which attacks the lining of a shaft
furnace. Raymond. -- Scouring rush. (Bot.) See Dutch rush, under Dutch.
-- Scouring stock (Woolen Manuf.), a kind of fulling mill.

Scour, v. i. 1. To clean anything by rubbing. Shak.

2. To cleanse anything.

    Warm water is softer than cold, for it scoureth better.


Bacon.

3. To be purged freely; to have a diarrhœa.

4. To run swiftly; to rove or range in pursuit or search of something;
to scamper.

    So four fierce coursers, starting to the race, Scour through the
    plain, and lengthen every pace.


Dryden.

Scour, n. Diarrhœa or dysentery among cattle.

Scour"age (?; 48), n. Refuse water after scouring.

Scour"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, scours.

2. A rover or footpad; a prowling robber.

    In those days of highwaymen and scourers.


Macaulay.

Scourge (?), n. [F. escourgée, fr. L. excoriata (sc. scutica) a
stripped off (lash or whip), fr. excoriare to strip, to skin. See
Excoriate.] 1. A lash; a strap or cord; especially, a lash used to
inflict pain or punishment; an instrument of punishment or discipline;
a whip.

    Up to coach then goes The observed maid, takes both the scourge and
    reins.


Chapman.

2. Hence, a means of inflicting punishment, vengeance, or suffering; an
infliction of affliction; a punishment.

    Sharp scourges of adversity.


Chaucer.

    What scourge for perjury Can this dark monarchy afford false
    Clarence?


Shak.

Scourge, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scourged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scourging
(?).] [From Scourge, n.: cf. OF. escorgier.] 1. To whip severely; to
lash.

    Is it lawful for you to scourge a . . . Roman?


Acts xxii. 25.

2. To punish with severity; to chastise; to afflict, as for sins or
faults, and with the purpose of correction.

    Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he
    receiveth.


Heb. xii. 6.

3. To harass or afflict severely.

    To scourge and impoverish the people.


Brougham.

Scour"ger (?), n. One who scourges or punishes; one who afflicts
severely.

    The West must own the scourger of the world.


Byron.

Scourse (skrs), v. t. See Scorse. [Obs.]

Scouse (skous), n. (Naut.) A sailor's dish. Bread scouse contains no
meat; lobscouse contains meat, etc. See Lobscouse. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

Scout (skout), n. [Icel. skta a small craft or cutter.] A swift sailing
boat. [Obs.]

    So we took a scout, very much pleased with the manner and
    conversation of the passengers.


Pepys.

Scout, n. [Icel. skta to jut out. Cf. Scout to reject.] A projecting
rock. [Prov. Eng.] Wright.

Scout (skout), v. t. [Icel. skta a taunt; cf. Icel. skta to jut out,
skota to shove, skjta to shoot, to shove. See Shoot.] To reject with
contempt, as something absurd; to treat with ridicule; to flout; as, to
scout an idea or an apology. "Flout 'em and scout 'em." Shak.

Scout, n. [OF. escoute scout, spy, fr. escouter, escolter, to listen,
to hear, F. écouter, fr. L. auscultare, to hear with attention, to
listen to. See Auscultation.] 1. A person sent out to gain and bring in
tidings; especially, one employed in war to gain information of the
movements and condition of an enemy.

    Scouts each coast light-armèd scour, Each quarter, to descry the
    distant foe.


Milton.

2. A college student's or undergraduate's servant; -- so called in
Oxford, England; at Cambridge called a gyp; and at Dublin, a skip.
[Cant]

3. (Cricket) A fielder in a game for practice.

4. The act of scouting or reconnoitering. [Colloq.]

    While the rat is on the scout.


Cowper.

Syn. -- Scout, Spy. -- In a military sense a scout is a soldier who
does duty in his proper uniform, however hazardous his adventure. A spy
is one who in disguise penetrates the enemies' lines, or lurks near
them, to obtain information.

Scout, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scouted; p. pr. & vb. n. Scouting.] 1. To
observe, watch, or look for, as a scout; to follow for the purpose of
observation, as a scout.

    Take more men, And scout him round.


Beau. & Fl.

2. To pass over or through, as a scout; to reconnoiter; as, to scout a
country.

Scout, v. i. To go on the business of scouting, or watching the motions
of an enemy; to act as a scout.

    With obscure wing Scout far and wide into the realm of night.


Milton.

Scov"el (skv"'l), n. [OF. escouve, escouvette, broom, L. scopae, or cf.
W. ysgubell, dim. of ysgub a broom.] A mop for sweeping ovens; a
malkin.

Scow (skou), n. [D. schouw.] (Naut.) A large flat-bottomed boat, having
broad, square ends.

Scow, v. t. To transport in a scow.

Scowl (skoul), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scowled (skould); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scowling.] [Akin to Dan. skule; cf. Icel. skolla to skulk, LG. schulen
to hide one's self, D. schuilen, G. schielen to squint, Dan. skele, Sw.
skela, AS. sceolh squinting. Cf. Skulk.] 1. To wrinkle the brows, as in
frowning or displeasure; to put on a frowning look; to look sour,
sullen, severe, or angry.

    She scowled and frowned with froward countenance.


Spenser.

2. Hence, to look gloomy, dark, or threatening; to lower. "The scowling
heavens." Thomson.

Scowl, v. t. 1. To look at or repel with a scowl or a frown. Milton.

2. To express by a scowl; as, to scowl defiance.

Scowl, n. 1. The wrinkling of the brows or face in frowing; the
expression of displeasure, sullenness, or discontent in the
countenance; an angry frown.

    With solemn phiz, and critic scowl.


Lloyd.

2. Hence, gloom; dark or threatening aspect. Burns.

    A ruddy storm, whose scowl Made heaven's radiant face look foul.


Crashaw.

Scowl"ing*ly, adv. In a scowling manner.

Scrab"bed eggs` (?). [CF. Scramble.] A Lenten dish, composed of eggs
boiled hard, chopped, and seasoned with butter, salt, and pepper.
Halliwell.

Scrab"ble (skrb"b'l), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scrabbled (?); p. pr. & vb.
n. Scrabbling (?).] [Freq. of scrape. Cf. Scramble, Scrawl, v. t.] 1.
To scrape, paw, or scratch with the hands; to proceed by clawing with
the hands and feet; to scramble; as, to scrabble up a cliff or a tree.

    Now after a while Little-faith came to himself, and getting up made
    shift to scrabble on his way.


Bunyan.

2. To make irregular, crooked, or unmeaning marks; to scribble; to
scrawl.

    David . . . scrabbled on the doors of the gate.


1. Sam. xxi. 13.

Scrab"ble, v. t. To mark with irregular lines or letters; to scribble;
as, to scrabble paper.

Scrab"ble, n. The act of scrabbling; a moving upon the hands and knees;
a scramble; also, a scribble.

Scra"ber (?), n. [Cf. Scrabble.] (Zoöl.) (a) The Manx shearwater. (b)
The black guillemot.

Scraf"fle (skrf"f'l), v. i. [See Scramble: cf. OD. schraeffelen to
scrape.] To scramble or struggle; to wrangle; also, to be industrious.
[Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Scrag (skrg), n. [Cf. dial. Sw. skraka a great dry tree, a long, lean
man, Gael. sgreagach dry, shriveled, rocky. See Shrink, and cf. Scrog,
Shrag, n.] 1. Something thin, lean, or rough; a bony piece; especially,
a bony neckpiece of meat; hence, humorously or in contempt, the neck.

    Lady MacScrew, who . . . serves up a scrag of mutton on silver.


Thackeray.

2. A rawboned person. [Low] Halliwell.

3. A ragged, stunted tree or branch.

Scrag whale (Zoöl.), a North Atlantic whalebone whale (Agaphelus
gibbosus). By some it is considered the young of the right whale.

Scrag"ged (?), a. 1. Rough with irregular points, or a broken surface;
scraggy; as, a scragged backbone.

2. Lean and rough; scraggy.

Scrag"ged*ness, n. Quality or state of being scragged.

Scrag"gi*ly (?), adv. In a scraggy manner.

Scrag"gi*ness, n. The quality or state of being scraggy; scraggedness.

Scrag"gy (?), a. [Compar. Scragger (?); superl. Scraggiest.] 1. Rough
with irregular points; scragged. "A scraggy rock." J. Philips.

2. Lean and rough; scragged. "His sinewy, scraggy neck." Sir W. Scott.

Scrag"ly, a. See Scraggy.

Scrag"-necked` (?), a. Having a scraggy neck.

Scram"ble (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scrambled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scrambling (?).] [Freq. of Prov. E. scramb to rake together with the
hands, or of scramp to snatch at. cf. Scrabble.] 1. To clamber with
hands and knees; to scrabble; as, to scramble up a cliff; to scramble
over the rocks.

2. To struggle eagerly with others for something thrown upon the
ground; to go down upon all fours to seize something; to catch rudely
at what is desired.

    Of other care they little reckoning make, Than how to scramble at
    the shearer's feast.


Milton.

Scram"ble (?), v. t. 1. To collect by scrambling; as, to scramble up
wealth. Marlowe.

2. To prepare (eggs) as a dish for the table, by stirring the yolks and
whites together while cooking.

Scram"ble, n. 1. The act of scrambling, climbing on all fours, or
clambering.

2. The act of jostling and pushing for something desired; eager and
unceremonious struggle for what is thrown or held out; as, a scramble
for office.

    Scarcity [of money] enhances its price, and increases the scramble.


Locke.

Scram"bler (?), n. 1. One who scrambles; one who climbs on all fours.

2. A greedy and unceremonious contestant.

Scram"bling (?), a. Confused and irregular; awkward; scambling. --
Scram"bling*ly, adv.

    A huge old scrambling bedroom.


Sir W. Scott.

Scranch (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scranched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scranching.] [Cf. D. schransen to eat greedily, G. schranzen. Cf.
Crunch, Scrunch.] To grind with the teeth, and with a crackling sound;
to craunch. [Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U. S.]

Scrank"y (?), a. Thin; lean. [Scot.]

Scran"nel (?), a. [Cf. Scrawny.] Slight; thin; lean; poor.

    Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw.


Milton.

Scran"ny (?), a. [See Scrannel.] Thin; lean; meager; scrawny; scrannel.
[Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Scrap (skrp), n. [OE. scrappe, fr. Icel. skrap trifle, cracking. See
Scrape, v. t.] 1. Something scraped off; hence, a small piece; a bit; a
fragment; a detached, incomplete portion.

    I have no materials -- not a scrap.


De Quincey.

2. Specifically, a fragment of something written or printed; a brief
excerpt; an unconnected extract.

3. pl. The crisp substance that remains after drying out animal fat;
as, pork scraps.

4. pl. Same as Scrap iron, below.

Scrap forgings, forgings made from wrought iron scrap. -- Scrap iron.
(a) Cuttings and waste pieces of wrought iron from which bar iron or
forgings can be made; -- called also wrought-iron scrap. (b) Fragments
of cast iron or defective castings suitable for remelting in the
foundry; -- called also foundry scrap, or cast scrap.

Scrap"book` (?), n. A blank book in which extracts cut from books and
papers may be pasted and kept.

Scrape (skrp), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scraped (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scraping.] [Icel. skrapa; akin to Sw. skrapa, Dan. skrabe, D. schrapen,
schrabben, G. schrappen, and prob. to E. sharp.] 1. To rub over the
surface of (something) with a sharp or rough instrument; to rub over
with something that roughens by removing portions of the surface; to
grate harshly over; to abrade; to make even, or bring to a required
condition or form, by moving the sharp edge of an instrument
breadthwise over the surface with pressure, cutting away excesses and
superfluous parts; to make smooth or clean; as, to scrape a bone with a
knife; to scrape a metal plate to an even surface.

2. To remove by rubbing or scraping (in the sense above).

    I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of
    a rock.


Ezek. xxvi. 4.

3. To collect by, or as by, a process of scraping; to gather in small
portions by laborious effort; hence, to acquire avariciously and save
penuriously; -- often followed by together or up; as, to scrape money
together.

    The prelatical party complained that, to swell a number the
    nonconformists did not choose, but scrape, subscribers.


Fuller.

4. To express disapprobation of, as a play, or to silence, as a
speaker, by drawing the feet back and forth upon the floor; -- usually
with down. Macaulay.

To scrape acquaintance, to seek acquaintance otherwise than by an
introduction. Farquhar.

    He tried to scrape acquaintance with her, but failed ignominiously.


G. W. Cable.

Scrape, v. i. 1. To rub over the surface of anything with something
which roughens or removes it, or which smooths or cleans it; to rub
harshly and noisily along.

2. To occupy one's self with getting laboriously; as, he scraped and
saved until he became rich. "[Spend] their scraping fathers' gold."
Shak.

3. To play awkwardly and inharmoniously on a violin or like instrument.

4. To draw back the right foot along the ground or floor when making a
bow.

Scrape, n. 1. The act of scraping; also, the effect of scraping, as a
scratch, or a harsh sound; as, a noisy scrape on the floor; a scrape of
a pen.

2. A drawing back of the right foot when bowing; also, a bow made with
that accompaniment. H. Spencer.

3. A disagreeable and embarrassing predicament out of which one can not
get without undergoing, as it were, a painful rubbing or scraping; a
perplexity; a difficulty.

    The too eager pursuit of this his old enemy through thick and thin
    has led him into many of these scrapes.


Bp. Warburton.

Scrape"pen`ny (?), n. One who gathers and hoards money in trifling
sums; a miser.

Scrap"er (?), n. 1. An instrument with which anything is scraped.
Specifically: (a) An instrument by which the soles of shoes are cleaned
from mud and the like, by drawing them across it. (b) An instrument
drawn by oxen or horses, used for scraping up earth in making or
repairing roads, digging cellars, canals etc. (c) (Naut.) An instrument
having two or three sharp sides or edges, for cleaning the planks,
masts, or decks of a ship. (d) (Lithography) In the printing press, a
board, or blade, the edge of which is made to rub over the tympan sheet
and thus produce the impression.

2. One who scrapes. Specifically: (a) One who plays awkwardly on a
violin. (b) One who acquires avariciously and saves penuriously.

Scrap"ing (?), n. 1. The act of scraping; the act or process of making
even, or reducing to the proper form, by means of a scraper.

2. Something scraped off; that which is separated from a substance, or
is collected by scraping; as, the scraping of the street.

Scrap"ing, a. Resembling the act of, or the effect produced by, one
who, or that which, scrapes; as, a scraping noise; a scraping miser. --
Scrap"ing*ly, adv.

Scrap"pi*ly (?), adv. In a scrappy manner; in scraps. Mary Cowden
Clarke.

Scrap"py (?), a. Consisting of scraps; fragmentary; lacking unity or
consistency; as, a scrappy lecture.

    A dreadfully scrappy dinner.


Thackeray.

Scrat (?), v. t. [OE. scratten. Cf. Scratch.] To scratch. [Obs.]
Burton.

Scrat, v. i. To rake; to search. [Obs.] Mir. for Mag.

Scrat, n. [Cf. AS. scritta an hermaphrodite, Ir. scrut a scrub, a low,
mean person, Gael. sgrut, sgruit, an old, shriveled person.] An
hermaphrodite. [Obs.] Skinner.

Scratch (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scratched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scratching.] [OE. cracchen (perhaps influenced by OE. scratten to
scratch); cf. OHG. chrazzn, G. kratzen, OD. kratsen, kretsen, D.
krassen, Sw. kratsa to scrape, kratta to rake, to scratch, Dan. kradse
to scratch, to scrape, Icel. krota to engrave. Cf. Grate to rub.] 1. To
rub and tear or mark the surface of with something sharp or ragged; to
scrape, roughen, or wound slightly by drawing something pointed or
rough across, as the claws, the nails, a pin, or the like.

    Small sand-colored stones, so hard as to scratch glass.


Grew.

    Be mindful, when invention fails, To scratch your head, and bite
    your nails.


Swift.

2. To write or draw hastily or awkwardly. "Scratch out a pamphlet."
Swift.

3. To cancel by drawing one or more lines through, as the name of a
candidate upon a ballot, or of a horse in a list; hence, to erase; to
efface; -- often with out.

4. To dig or excavate with the claws; as, some animals scratch holes,
in which they burrow.

To scratch a ticket, to cancel one or more names of candidates on a
party ballot; to refuse to vote the party ticket in its entirety. [U.
S.]

Scratch, v. i. 1. To use the claws or nails in tearing or in digging;
to make scratches.

    Dull, tame things, . . . that will neither bite nor scratch.


Dr. H. More.

2. (Billiards) To score, not by skillful play but by some fortunate
chance of the game. [Cant, U. S.]

Scratch, n. 1. A break in the surface of a thing made by scratching, or
by rubbing with anything pointed or rough; a slight wound, mark,
furrow, or incision.

    The coarse file . . . makes deep scratches in the work.


Moxon.

    These nails with scratches deform my breast.


Prior.

    God forbid a shallow scratch should drive The prince of Wales from
    such a field as this.


Shak.

2. (Pugilistic Matches) A line across the prize ring; up to which
boxers are brought when they join fight; hence, test, trial, or proof
of courage; as, to bring to the scratch; to come up to the scratch.
[Cant] Grose.

3. pl. (Far.) Minute, but tender and troublesome, excoriations, covered
with scabs, upon the heels of horses which have been used where it is
very wet or muddy. Law (Farmer's Veter. Adviser).

4. A kind of wig covering only a portion of the head.

5. (Billiards) A shot which scores by chance and not as intended by the
player; a fluke. [Cant, U. S.]

Scratch cradle. See Cratch cradle, under Cratch. -- Scratch grass
(Bot.), a climbing knotweed (Polygonum sagittatum) with a square stem
beset with fine recurved prickles along the angles. -- Scratch wig.
Same as Scratch, 4, above. Thackeray.

Scratch, a. Made, done, or happening by chance; arranged with little or
no preparation; determined by circumstances; haphazard; as, a scratch
team; a scratch crew for a boat race; a scratch shot in billiards.
[Slang]

Scratch race, one without restrictions regarding the entrance of
competitors; also, one for which the competitors are chosen by lot.

Scratch"back` (?), n. A toy which imitates the sound of tearing cloth,
-- used by drawing it across the back of unsuspecting persons. [Eng.]

Scratch"brush` (?), n. A stiff wire brush for cleaning iron castings
and other metal.

Scratch" coat` (?). The first coat in plastering; -- called also
scratchwork. See Pricking-up.

Scratch"er (?), n. One who, or that which, scratches; specifically
(Zoöl.), any rasorial bird.

Scratch"ing, adv. With the action of scratching.

Scratch"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) Cleavers.

Scratch"work` (?), n. See Scratch coat.

Scratch"y (?), a. Characterized by scratches.

Scraw (skr), n. [Ir. scrath a turf, sgraith a turf, green sod; akin to
Gael. sgrath, sgroth, the outer skin of anything, a turf, a green sod.]
A turf. [Obs.] Swift.

Scrawl (?), v. i. See Crawl. [Obs.] Latimer.

Scrawl, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scrawled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scrawling.]
[Probably corrupted from scrabble.] To draw or mark awkwardly and
irregularly; to write hastily and carelessly; to scratch; to scribble;
as, to scrawl a letter.

    His name, scrawled by himself.


Macaulay.

Scrawl, v. i. To write unskillfully and inelegantly.

    Though with a golden pen you scrawl.


Swift.

Scrawl (skrl), n. Unskillful or inelegant writing; that which is
unskillfully or inelegantly written.

    The left hand will make such a scrawl, that it will not be legible.


Arbuthnot.

    You bid me write no more than a scrawl to you.


Gray.

Scrawl"er (-r), n. One who scrawls; a hasty, awkward writer.

Scraw"ny (?), a. [Cf. Scrannel.] Meager; thin; rawboned; bony; scranny.

Scray (?), n. [Cf. W. ysgräen, ysgräell, a sea swallow, Armor. skrav.]
(Zoöl.) A tern; the sea swallow. [Prov. Eng.] [Written also scraye.]

Scre"a*ble (?), a. [L. screare to hawk, spit out.] Capable of being
spit out. [Obs.] Bailey.

Screak (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Screaked (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Screaking.] [Cf. Icel. skrækja to screech. Cf. Creak, v., Screech.] To
utter suddenly a sharp, shrill sound; to screech; to creak, as a door
or wheel.

Screak, n. A creaking; a screech; a shriek. Bp. Bull.

Scream (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Screamed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Screaming.] [Icel. skræma to scare, terrify; akin to Sw. skräma, Dan.
skræmme. Cf. Screech.] To cry out with a shrill voice; to utter a
sudden, sharp outcry, or shrill, loud cry, as in fright or extreme
pain; to shriek; to screech.

    I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry.


Shak.

    And scream thyself as none e'er screamed before.


Pope.

Scream, n. A sharp, shrill cry, uttered suddenly, as in terror or in
pain; a shriek; a screech. "Screams of horror." Pope.

Scream"er (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of three species of South American
birds constituting the family Anhimidæ, and the suborder Palamedeæ.
They have two spines on each wing, and the head is either crested or
horned. They are easily tamed, and then serve as guardians for other
poultry. The crested screamers, or chajas, belong to the genus Chauna.
The horned screamer, or kamichi, is Palamedea cornuta.

Scream"ing, a. 1. Uttering screams; shrieking.

2. Having the nature of a scream; like a scream; shrill; sharp.

    The fearful matrons raise a screaming cry.


Dryden.

Scree (skr), n. A pebble; a stone; also, a heap of stones or rocky
débris. [Prov. Eng.] Southey.

Screech (skrch), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Screeched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Screeching.] [Also formerly, scritch, OE. skriken, skrichen, schriken,
of Scand. origin; cf. Icel. skrækja to shriek, to screech, skrkja to
titter, Sw. skrika to shriek, Dan. skrige; also Gael. sgreach, sgreuch,
W. ysgrechio, Skr. kharj to creak. Cf. Shriek, v., Scream, v.] To utter
a harsh, shrill cry; to make a sharp outcry, as in terror or acute
pain; to scream; to shriek. "The screech owl, screeching loud." Shak.

Screech, n. A harsh, shrill cry, as of one in acute pain or in fright;
a shriek; a scream.

Screech bird, or Screech thrush (Zoöl.), the fieldfare; -- so called
from its harsh cry before rain. -- Screech rain. -- Screech hawk
(Zoöl.), the European goatsucker; -- so called from its note. [Prov.
Eng.] -- Screech owl. (Zoöl.) (a) A small American owl (Scops asio),
either gray or reddish in color. (b) The European barn owl. The name is
applied also to other species.

Screech"ers (?), n. pl. (Zoöl.) The picarian birds, as distinguished
from the singing birds.

Screech"y (?), a. Like a screech; shrill and harsh.

Screed (skrd), n. [Prov. E., a shred, the border of a cap. See Shred.]
1. (Arch.) (a) A strip of plaster of the thickness proposed for the
coat, applied to the wall at intervals of four or five feet, as a
guide. (b) A wooden straightedge used to lay across the plaster screed,
as a limit for the thickness of the coat.

2. A fragment; a portion; a shred. [Scot.]

Screed, n. [See 1st Screed. For sense 2 cf. also Gael. sgread an
outcry.] 1. A breach or rent; a breaking forth into a loud, shrill
sound; as, martial screeds.

2. An harangue; a long tirade on any subject.

    The old carl gae them a screed of doctrine; ye might have heard him
    a mile down the wind.


Sir W. Scott.

Screen (skrn), n. [OE. scren, OF. escrein, escran, F. écran, of
uncertain origin; cf. G. schirm a screen, OHG. scirm, scerm a
protection, shield, or G. schragen a trestle, a stack of wood, or G.
schranne a railing.] 1. Anything that separates or cuts off
inconvenience, injury, or danger; that which shelters or conceals from
view; a shield or protection; as, a fire screen.

    Your leavy screens throw down.


Shak.

    Some ambitious men seem as screens to princes in matters of danger
    and envy.


Bacon.

2. (Arch.) A dwarf wall or partition carried up to a certain height for
separation and protection, as in a church, to separate the aisle from
the choir, or the like.

3. A surface, as that afforded by a curtain, sheet, wall, etc., upon
which an image, as a picture, is thrown by a magic lantern, solar
microscope, etc.

4. A long, coarse riddle or sieve, sometimes a revolving perforated
cylinder, used to separate the coarser from the finer parts, as of
coal, sand, gravel, and the like.

Screen (skrn), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Screened (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Screening.] 1. To provide with a shelter or means of concealment; to
separate or cut off from inconvenience, injury, or danger; to shelter;
to protect; to protect by hiding; to conceal; as, fruits screened from
cold winds by a forest or hill.

    They were encouraged and screened by some who were in high
    commands.


Macaulay.

2. To pass, as coal, gravel, ashes, etc., through a screen in order to
separate the coarse from the fine, or the worthless from the valuable;
to sift.

Screen"ings (?), n. pl. The refuse left after screening sand, coal,
ashes, etc.

Screw (skr), n. [OE. scrue, OF. escroue, escroe, female screw, F.
écrou, L. scrobis a ditch, trench, in LL., the hole made by swine in
rooting; cf. D. schroef a screw, G. schraube, Icel. skrfa.] 1. A
cylinder, or a cylindrical perforation, having a continuous rib, called
the thread, winding round it spirally at a constant inclination, so as
to leave a continuous spiral groove between one turn and the next, --
used chiefly for producing, when revolved, motion or pressure in the
direction of its axis, by the sliding of the threads of the cylinder in
the grooves between the threads of the perforation adapted to it, the
former being distinguished as the external, or male screw, or, more
usually the screw; the latter as the internal, or female screw, or,
more usually, the nut.

The screw, as a mechanical power, is a modification of the inclined
plane, and may be regarded as a right-angled triangle wrapped round a
cylinder, the hypotenuse of the marking the spiral thread of the screw,
its base equaling the circumference of the cylinder, and its height the
pitch of the thread.

2. Specifically, a kind of nail with a spiral thread and a head with a
nick to receive the end of the screw-driver. Screws are much used to
hold together pieces of wood or to fasten something; -- called also
wood screws, and screw nails. See also Screw bolt, below.

3. Anything shaped or acting like a screw; esp., a form of wheel for
propelling steam vessels. It is placed at the stern, and furnished with
blades having helicoidal surfaces to act against the water in the
manner of a screw. See Screw propeller, below.

4. A steam vesel propelled by a screw instead of wheels; a screw
steamer; a propeller.

5. An extortioner; a sharp bargainer; a skinflint; a niggard.
Thackeray.

6. An instructor who examines with great or unnecessary severity; also,
a searching or strict examination of a student by an instructor. [Cant,
American Colleges]

7. A small packet of tobacco. [Slang] Mayhew.

8. An unsound or worn-out horse, useful as a hack, and commonly of good
appearance. Ld. Lytton.

9. (Math.) A straight line in space with which a definite linear
magnitude termed the pitch is associated (cf. 5th Pitch, 10 (b)). It is
used to express the displacement of a rigid body, which may always be
made to consist of a rotation about an axis combined with a translation
parallel to that axis.

10. (Zoöl.) An amphipod crustacean; as, the skeleton screw (Caprella).
See Sand screw, under Sand.

Archimedes screw, Compound screw, Foot screw, etc. See under
Archimedes, Compound, Foot, etc. -- A screw loose, something out of
order, so that work is not done smoothly; as, there is a screw loose
somewhere. H. Martineau. -- Endless, or perpetual, screw, a screw used
to give motion to a toothed wheel by the action of its threads between
the teeth of the wheel; -- called also a worm. -- Lag screw. See under
Lag. -- Micrometer screw, a screw with fine threads, used for the
measurement of very small spaces. -- Right and left screw, a screw
having threads upon the opposite ends which wind in opposite
directions. -- Screw alley. See Shaft alley, under Shaft. -- Screw
bean. (Bot.) (a) The curious spirally coiled pod of a leguminous tree
(Prosopis pubescens) growing from Texas to California. It is used for
fodder, and ground into meal by the Indians. (b) The tree itself. Its
heavy hard wood is used for fuel, for fencing, and for railroad ties.
-- Screw bolt, a bolt having a screw thread on its shank, in
distinction from a key bolt. See 1st Bolt, 3. -- Screw box, a device,
resembling a die, for cutting the thread on a wooden screw. -- Screw
dock. See under Dock. -- Screw engine, a marine engine for driving a
screw propeller. -- Screw gear. See Spiral gear, under Spiral. -- Screw
jack. Same as Jackscrew. -- Screw key, a wrench for turning a screw or
nut; a spanner wrench. -- Screw machine. (a) One of a series of
machines employed in the manufacture of wood screws. (b) A machine tool
resembling a lathe, having a number of cutting tools that can be caused
to act on the work successively, for making screws and other turned
pieces from metal rods. -- Screw pine (Bot.), any plant of the
endogenous genus Pandanus, of which there are about fifty species,
natives of tropical lands from Africa to Polynesia; -- named from the
spiral arrangement of the pineapple-like leaves. -- Screw plate, a
device for cutting threads on small screws, consisting of a thin steel
plate having a series of perforations with internal screws forming
dies. -- Screw press, a press in which pressure is exerted by means of
a screw. -- Screw propeller, a screw or spiral bladed wheel, used in
the propulsion of steam vessels; also, a steam vessel propelled by a
screw. -- Screw shell (Zoöl.), a long, slender, spiral gastropod shell,
especially of the genus Turritella and allied genera. See Turritella.
-- Screw steamer, a steamship propelled by a screw. -- Screw thread,
the spiral rib which forms a screw. -- Screw stone (Paleon.), the
fossil stem of an encrinite. -- Screw tree (Bot.), any plant of the
genus Helicteres, consisting of about thirty species of tropical
shrubs, with simple leaves and spirally twisted, five-celled capsules;
-- also called twisted-horn, and twisty. -- Screw valve, a stop valve
which is opened or closed by a screw. -- Screw worm (Zoöl.), the larva
of an American fly (Compsomyia macellaria), allied to the blowflies,
which sometimes deposits its eggs in the nostrils, or about wounds, in
man and other animals, with fatal results. -- Screw wrench. (a) A
wrench for turning a screw. (b) A wrench with an adjustable jaw that is
moved by a screw. -- To put the screw, or screws, on, to use pressure
upon, as for the purpose of extortion; to coerce. -- To put under the
screw or screws, to subject to pressure; to force. -- Wood screw, a
metal screw with a sharp thread of coarse pitch, adapted to holding
fast in wood. See Illust. of Wood screw, under Wood.

Screw (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Screwed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Screwing.]
1. To turn, as a screw; to apply a screw to; to press, fasten, or make
firm, by means of a screw or screws; as, to screw a lock on a door; to
screw a press.

2. To force; to squeeze; to press, as by screws.

    But screw your courage to the sticking place, And we'll not fail.


Shak.

3. Hence: To practice extortion upon; to oppress by unreasonable or
extortionate exactions.

    Our country landlords, by unmeasurable screwing and racking their
    tenants, have already reduced the miserable people to a worse
    condition than the peasants in France.


swift.

4. To twist; to distort; as, to screw his visage.

    He screwed his face into a hardened smile.


Dryden.

5. To examine rigidly, as a student; to subject to a severe
examination. [Cant, American Colleges]

To screw out, to press out; to extort. - - To screw up, to force; to
bring by violent pressure. Howell. -- To screw in, to force in by
turning or twisting.

Screw, v. i. 1. To use violent mans in making exactions; to be
oppressive or exacting. Howitt.

2. To turn one's self uneasily with a twisting motion; as, he screws
about in his chair.

Screw"-cut`ting (?), a. Adapted for forming a screw by cutting; as, a
screw-cutting lathe.

Screw"-driv`er (?), n. A tool for turning screws so as to drive them
into their place. It has a thin end which enters the nick in the head
of the screw.

Screw"er (?), n. One who, or that which, screws.

Screw"ing, a. & n. from Screw, v. t.

Screwing machine. See Screw machine, under Screw.

Scrib"a*ble (?), a. [See Scribe.] Capable of being written, or of being
written upon. [R.]

Scri*ba"tious (?), a. [See Scribe.] Skillful in, or fond of, writing.
[Obs.] Barrow.

Scrib"bet (?), n. A painter's pencil.

Scrib"ble (?), v. t. [Cf. Scrabble.] (Woolen Manuf.) To card coarsely;
to run through the scribbling machine.

Scrib"ble, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scribbled (-b'ld); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scribbling (-blng).] [From Scribe.] 1. To write hastily or carelessly,
without regard to correctness or elegance; as, to scribble a letter.

2. To fill or cover with careless or worthless writing.

Scrib"ble, v. i. To write without care, elegance, or value; to scrawl.

    If Mævius scribble in Apollo's spite.


Pope.

Scrib"ble, n. Hasty or careless writing; a writing of little value; a
scrawl; as, a hasty scribble. Boyle.

    Neither did I but vacant seasons spend In this my scribble.


Bunyan.

Scrib"ble*ment (?), n. A scribble. [R.] Foster.

Scrib"bler (?), n. One who scribbles; a petty author; a writer of no
reputation; a literary hack.

    The scribbler, pinched with hunger, writes to dine.


Granville.

Scrib"bler, n. A scribbling machine.

Scrib"bling (?), n. [See 1st Scribble.] The act or process of carding
coarsely.

Scribbling machine, the machine used for the first carding of wool or
other fiber; -- called also scribbler.

Scrib"bling, a. Writing hastily or poorly.

    Ye newspaper witlings! ye pert scribbling folks!


Goldsmith.

Scrib"bling, n. The act of writing hastily or idly.

Scrib"bling*ly, adv. In a scribbling manner.

Scribe (skrb), n. [L. scriba, fr. scribere to write; cf. Gr. ska`rifos
a splinter, pencil, style (for writing), E. scarify. Cf. Ascribe,
Describe, Script, Scrivener, Scrutoire.] 1. One who writes; a
draughtsman; a writer for another; especially, an offical or public
writer; an amanuensis or secretary; a notary; a copyist.

2. (Jewish Hist.) A writer and doctor of the law; one skilled in the
law and traditions; one who read and explained the law to the people.

Scribe (skrb), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scribed (skrbd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scribing.] 1. To write, engrave, or mark upon; to inscribe. Spenser.

2. (Carp.) To cut (anything) in such a way as to fit closely to a
somewhat irregular surface, as a baseboard to a floor which is out of
level, a board to the curves of a molding, or the like; -- so called
because the workman marks, or scribes, with the compasses the line that
he afterwards cuts.

3. To score or mark with compasses or a scribing iron.

Scribing iron, an iron-pointed instrument for scribing, or marking,
casks and logs.

Scribe, v. i. To make a mark.

    With the separated points of a pair of spring dividers scribe
    around the edge of the templet.


A. M. Mayer.

Scrib"er (?), n. A sharp-pointed tool, used by joiners for drawing
lines on stuff; a marking awl.

Scrib"ism (?), n. The character and opinions of a Jewish scribe in the
time of Christ. F. W. Robertson.

Scrid (?), n. A screed; a shred; a fragment. [R.]

Scrig"gle (?), v. i. To wriggle. [Prov. Eng.]

Scrim (?), n. 1. A kind of light cotton or linen fabric, often woven in
openwork patterns, -- used for curtains, etc,; -- called also India
scrim.

2. pl. Thin canvas glued on the inside of panels to prevent shrinking,
checking, etc.

Scri"mer (?), n. [F. escrimeur. See Skirmish.] A fencing master. [Obs.]
Shak.

Scrim"mage (?; 48), n. [A corruption of skirmish. "Sore scrymmishe."
Ld. Berners.] [Written also scrummage.] 1. Formerly, a skirmish; now, a
general row or confused fight or struggle.

2. (Football) The struggle in the rush lines after the ball is put in
play.

Scrimp (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scrimped (?; 215); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scrimping.] [Cf. Dan. skrumpe, G. schrumpfen, D. krimpen. Cf. Shrimp,
Shrink.] To make too small or short; to limit or straiten; to put on
short allowance; to scant; to contract; to shorten; as, to scrimp the
pattern of a coat.

Scrimp, a. Short; scanty; curtailed.

Scrimp, n. A pinching miser; a niggard. [U.S.]

Scrimp"ing, a. & n. from Scrimp, v. t.

Scrimping bar, a device used in connection with a calico printing
machine for stretching the fabric breadthwise so that it may be smooth
for printing. Knight.

Scrimp"ing*ly, adv. In a scrimping manner.

Scrimp"ness, n. The state of being scrimp.

Scrimp"tion (?), n. A small portion; a pittance; a little bit. [Prov.
Eng.] Halliwell.

Scrim"shaw` (?), v. t. To ornament, as shells, ivory, etc., by
engraving, and (usually) rubbing pigments into the incised lines.
[Sailor's cant. U.S.]

Scrim"shaw`, n. A shell, a whale's tooth, or the like, that is
scrimshawed. [Sailor's cant, U.S.]

Scrine (?), n. [L. scrinium a case for books, letters, etc.: cf. OF.
escrin, F. écrin. See Shrine.] A chest, bookcase, or other place, where
writings or curiosities are deposited; a shrine. [Obs.]

    But laid them up in immortal scrine.


Spenser.

Scringe (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scringed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scringing (?).] [Cf. Cringe.] To cringe. [Prov. Eng. & Local, U.S.]

Scrip (?), n. [OE. scrippe, probably of Scand. origin; cf. Icel. & OSw.
skreppa, and also LL. scrippum, OF. esquerpe, escrepe, F. écharpe
scarf. Cf. Scrap, Scarf a piece of dress.] A small bag; a wallet; a
satchel. [Archaic] Chaucer.

    And in requital ope his leathern scrip.


Milton.

Scrip, n. [From script.] 1. A small writing, certificate, or schedule;
a piece of paper containing a writing.

    Call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.


Shak.

    Bills of exchange can not pay our debts abroad, till scrips of
    paper can be made current coin.


Locke.

2. A preliminary certificate of a subscription to the capital of a
bank, railroad, or other company, or for a share of other joint
property, or a loan, stating the amount of the subscription and the
date of the payment of the installments; as, insurance scrip, consol
scrip, etc. When all the installments are paid, the scrip is exchanged
for a bond share certificate.

3. Paper fractional currency. [Colloq.U.S.]

Scrip"page (?; 48), n. The contents of a scrip, or wallet. [Obs.] Shak.

Script (?), n. [OE. scrit, L. scriptum something written, fr. scribere,
scriptum to write: cf. OF. escript, escrit, F. écrit. See Scribe, and
cf. Scrip a writing.] 1. A writing; a written document. [Obs.] Chaucer.

2. (Print.) Type made in imitation of handwriting.

3. (Law) An original instrument or document.

4. Written characters; style of writing.

Scrip*to"ri*um (?), n.; pl. Scriptoria (#). [LL. See Scriptory.] In an
abbey or monastery, the room set apart for writing or copying
manuscripts; in general, a room devoted to writing.

    Writing rooms, or scriptoria, where the chief works of Latin
    literature . . . were copied and illuminated.


J. R. Green.

Scrip"to*ry (?), a. [L. scriptorius, fr. scribere, scriptum to write.]
Of or pertaining to writing; expressed in writing; used in writing; as,
scriptory wills; a scriptory reed. [R.] Swift.

Scrip"tur*al (?; 135), a. Contained in the Scriptures; according to the
Scriptures, or sacred oracles; biblical; as, a scriptural doctrine.

Scrip"tur*al*ism (?), n. The quality or state of being scriptural;
literal adherence to the Scriptures.

Scrip"tur*al*ist, n. One who adheres literally to the Scriptures.

Scrip"tur*al*ly, adv. In a scriptural manner.

Scrip"tur*al*ness, n. Quality of being scriptural.

Scrip"ture (?; 135), n. [L. scriptura, fr. scribere, scriptum, to
write: cf. OF. escripture, escriture, F. écriture. See Scribe.] 1.
Anything written; a writing; a document; an inscription.

    I have put it in scripture and in remembrance.


Chaucer.

    Then the Lord of Manny read the scripture on the tomb, the which
    was in Latin.


Ld. Berners.

2. The books of the Old and the New Testament, or of either of them;
the Bible; -- used by way of eminence or distinction, and chiefly in
the plural.

    There is not any action a man ought to do, or to forbear, but the
    Scripture will give him a clear precept or prohibition for it.


South.

    Compared with the knowledge which the Scriptures contain, every
    other subject of human inquiry is vanity.


Buckminster.

3. A passage from the Bible; a text.

    The devil can cite Scripture for his purpose.


Shak.

    Hanging by the twined thread of one doubtful Scripture.


Milton.

Scrip*tu"ri*an (?), n. A Scripturist. [Obs.]

Scrip"tur*ist (?; 135), n. One who is strongly attached to, or versed
in, the Scriptures, or who endeavors to regulate his life by them.

    The Puritan was a Scripturist, -- a Scripturist with all his heart,
    if as yet with imperfect intelligence . . . he cherished the scheme
    of looking to the Word of God as his sole and universal directory.


Palfrey.

Scrit (?), n. [See Script.] Writing; document; scroll. [Obs.] "Of every
scrit and bond." Chaucer.

Scritch (?), n. A screech. [R.]

    Perhaps it is the owlet's scritch.


Coleridge.

Scrive"ner (? or ?), n. [From older scrivein, OF. escrivain, F.
écrivain, LL. scribanus, from L. scribere to write. See Scribe.] 1. A
professional writer; one whose occupation is to draw contracts or
prepare writings. Shak.

    The writer better scrivener than clerk.


Fuller.

2. One whose business is to place money at interest; a broker. [Obs.]
Dryden.

3. A writing master. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Scrivener's palsy. See Writer's cramp, under Writer.

||Scro*bic"u*la (?), n.; pl. Scrobiculæ (#). [NL. See Scrobiculate.]
||(Zoöl.) One of the smooth areas surrounding the tubercles of a sea
||urchin.

Scro*bic"u*lar (?), a. (Zoöl.) Pertaining to, or surrounding,
scrobiculæ; as, scrobicular tubercles.

{ Scro*bic"u*late (?), Scro*bic"u*la`ted (?) }, a. [L. scrobiculus,
dim. of scrobis a ditch or trench.] (Bot.) Having numerous small,
shallow depressions or hollows; pitted.

{ Scrod (?), Scrode (?) }, n. A young codfish, especially when cut open
on the back and dressed. [Written also escrod.] [Local, U.S.]

Scrod"dled ware` (?). Mottled pottery made from scraps of differently
colored clays.

Scrof"u*la (?), n. [L. scrofulae, fr. scrofa a breeding sow, because
swine were supposed to be subject to such a complaint, or by a fanciful
comparison of the glandular swellings to little pigs; perhaps akin to
Gr. &?; an old sow: cf. F. scrofules. Cf. Scroyle.] (Med.) A
constitutional disease, generally hereditary, especially manifested by
chronic enlargement and cheesy degeneration of the lymphatic glands,
particularly those of the neck, and marked by a tendency to the
development of chronic intractable inflammations of the skin, mucous
membrane, bones, joints, and other parts, and by a diminution in the
power of resistance to disease or injury and the capacity for recovery.
Scrofula is now generally held to be tuberculous in character, and may
develop into general or local tuberculosis (consumption).

Scrof"u*lide (? or ?), n. (Med.) Any affection of the skin dependent on
scrofula.

Scrof"u*lous (?), a. [Cf. F. scrofuleux.] 1. Pertaining to scrofula, or
partaking of its nature; as, scrofulous tumors; a scrofulous habit of
body.

2. Diseased or affected with scrofula.

    Scrofulous persons can never be duly nourished.


Arbuthnot.

-- Scrof"u*lous*ly, adv. -- Scrof"u*lous*ness, n.

Scrog (?), n. [Cf. Scrag, or Gael. sgrogag anything shriveled, from
sgrog to compress, shrivel.] A stunted shrub, bush, or branch. [Prov.
Eng. & Scot.]

Scrog"gy (?), a. Abounding in scrog; also, twisted; stunted. [Prov.
Eng. & Scot.] Halliwell.

Scroll (?), n. [A dim. of OE. scroue, scrowe (whence E. escrow), OF.
escroe, escroue, F. écrou entry in the jail book, LL. scroa scroll,
probably of Teutonic origin; cf. OD. schroode a strip, shred, slip of
paper, akin to E. shred. Cf. Shred, Escrow.] 1. A roll of paper or
parchment; a writing formed into a roll; a schedule; a list.

    The heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll.


Isa. xxxiv. 4.

    Here is the scroll of every man's name.


Shak.

2. (Arch.) An ornament formed of undulations giving off spirals or
sprays, usually suggestive of plant form. Roman architectural ornament
is largely of some scroll pattern.

3. A mark or flourish added to a person's signature, intended to
represent a seal, and in some States allowed as a substitute for a
seal. [U.S.] Burrill.

4. (Geom.) Same as Skew surface. See under Skew.

Linen scroll (Arch.) See under Linen. -- Scroll chuck (Mach.), an
adjustable chuck, applicable to a lathe spindle, for centering and
holding work, in which the jaws are adjusted and tightened
simultaneously by turning a disk having in its face a spiral groove
which is entered by teeth on the backs of the jaws. -- Scroll saw. See
under Saw.

Scrolled (?), a. Formed like a scroll; contained in a scroll; adorned
with scrolls; as, scrolled work.

||Scroph`u*la"ri*a (?), n. [NL. So called because it was reputed to be
||a remedy for scrofula.] (Bot.) A genus of coarse herbs having small
||flowers in panicled cymes; figwort.

Scroph`u*la`ri*a"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to a very large
natural order of gamopetalous plants (Scrophulariaceæ, or
Scrophularineæ), usually having irregular didynamous flowers and a
two-celled pod. The order includes the mullein, foxglove, snapdragon,
figwort, painted cup, yellow rattle, and some exotic trees, as the
Paulownia.

Scro"tal (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the scrotum; as, scrotal
hernia.

Scro"ti*form (?), a. [L. scrotum scrotum + -form.] Purse-shaped;
pouch-shaped.

Scro"to*cele (?), n. [Scrotum + Gr. kh`lh a tumor: cf. F. scrotocèle.]
(Med.) A rupture or hernia in the scrotum; scrotal hernia.

||Scro"tum (?), n. [L.] (Anat.) The bag or pouch which contains the
||testicles; the cod.

Scrouge (?), v. t. [Etymol. uncertain.] To crowd; to squeeze. [Prov.
Eng. & Colloq. U.S.]

Scrow (? or ?), n. [See Escrow, Scroll.] 1. A scroll. [Obs.] Palsgrave.

2. A clipping from skins; a currier's cuttings.

Scroyle (skroil), n. [Cf. OF. escrouselle a kind of vermin,
escrouelles, pl., scrofula, F. écrouelles, fr. (assumed) LL. scrofellae
for L. scrofulae. See Scrofula, and cf. Cruels.] A mean fellow; a
wretch. [Obs.] Shak.

Scrub (skrb), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scrubbed (skrbd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scrubbing.] [OE. scrobben, probably of Dutch or Scand. origin; cf. Dan.
skrubbe, Sw. skrubba, D. schrobben, LG. schrubben.] To rub hard; to
wash with rubbing; usually, to rub with a wet brush, or with something
coarse or rough, for the purpose of cleaning or brightening; as, to
scrub a floor, a doorplate.

Scrub, v. i. To rub anything hard, especially with a wet brush; to
scour; hence, to be diligent and penurious; as, to scrub hard for a
living.

Scrub, n. 1. One who labors hard and lives meanly; a mean fellow. "A
sorry scrub." Bunyan.

    We should go there in as proper a manner as possible; nor
    altogether like the scrubs about us.


Goldsmith.

2. Something small and mean.

3. A worn-out brush. Ainsworth.

4. A thicket or jungle, often specified by the name of the prevailing
plant; as, oak scrub, palmetto scrub, etc.

5. (Stock Breeding) One of the common live stock of a region of no
particular breed or not of pure breed, esp. when inferior in size, etc.
[U.S.]

Scrub bird (Zoöl.), an Australian passerine bird of the family
Atrichornithidæ, as Atrichia clamosa; -- called also brush bird. --
Scrub oak (Bot.), the popular name of several dwarfish species of oak.
The scrub oak of New England and the Middle States is Quercus
ilicifolia, a scraggy shrub; that of the Southern States is a small
tree (Q. Catesbæi); that of the Rocky Mountain region is Q. undulata,
var. Gambelii. -- Scrub robin (Zoöl.), an Australian singing bird of
the genus Drymodes.

Scrub, a. Mean; dirty; contemptible; scrubby.

    How solitary, how scrub, does this town look!


Walpole.

    No little scrub joint shall come on my board.


Swift.

Scrub game, a game, as of ball, by unpracticed players. -- Scrub race,
a race between scrubs, or between untrained animals or contestants.

Scrub"bed (?), a. Dwarfed or stunted; scrubby.

Scrub"ber (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, scrubs; esp., a brush used
in scrubbing.

2. (Gas Manuf.) A gas washer. See under Gas.

Scrub"board` (?), n. A baseboard; a mopboard.

Scrub"by (?), a. [Compar. Scrubbier (?); superl. Scrubbiest.] Of the
nature of scrub; small and mean; stunted in growth; as, a scrubby cur.
"Dense, scrubby woods." Duke of Argyll.

Scrub"stone` (?), n. A species of calciferous sandstone. [Prov. Eng.]

Scruff (?), n. [See Scurf.] Scurf. [Obs.]

Scruff, n. [Cf. Scuff.] The nape of the neck; the loose outside skin,
as of the back of the neck.

Scrum"mage (?; 43), n. See Scrimmage.

Scrump"tious (?), a. Nice; particular; fastidious; excellent; fine.
[Slang]

Scrunch (?), v. t. & v. i. [Cf. Scranch, Crunch.] To scranch; to
crunch. Dickens.

Scru"ple (?), n. [L. scrupulus a small sharp or pointed stone, the
twenty-fourth part of an ounce, a scruple, uneasiness, doubt, dim. of
scrupus a rough or sharp stone, anxiety, uneasiness; perh. akin to Gr.
&?; the chippings of stone, &?; a razor, Skr. kshura: cf. F. scrupule.]
1. A weight of twenty grains; the third part of a dram.

2. Hence, a very small quantity; a particle.

    I will not bate thee a scruple.


Shak.

3. Hesitation as to action from the difficulty of determining what is
right or expedient; unwillingness, doubt, or hesitation proceeding from
motives of conscience.

    He was made miserable by the conflict between his tastes and his
    scruples.


Macaulay.

To make scruple, to hesitate from conscientious motives; to scruple.
Locke.

Scru"ple, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scrupled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scrupling
(?).] To be reluctant or to hesitate, as regards an action, on account
of considerations of conscience or expedience.

    We are often over-precise, scrupling to say or do those things
    which lawfully we may.


Fuller.

    Men scruple at the lawfulness of a set form of divine worship.


South.

Scru"ple, v. t. 1. To regard with suspicion; to hesitate at; to
question.

    Others long before them . . . scrupled more the books of heretics
    than of gentiles.


Milton.

2. To excite scruples in; to cause to scruple. [R.]

    Letters which did still scruple many of them.


E. Symmons.

Scru"pler (?), n. One who scruples.

Scru"pu*list (?), n. A scrupler. [Obs.]

Scru"pu*lize (?), v. t. To perplex with scruples; to regard with
scruples. [Obs.] Bp. Montagu.

Scru`pu*los"i*ty (skr`p*ls"*t), n. [L. scrupulositas.] The quality or
state of being scrupulous; doubt; doubtfulness respecting decision or
action; caution or tenderness from the fear of doing wrong or
offending; nice regard to exactness and propriety; precision.

    The first sacrilege is looked on with horror; but when they have
    made the breach, their scrupulosity soon retires.


Dr. H. More.

    Careful, even to scrupulosity, . . . to keep their Sabbath.


South.

Scru"pu*lous (?), a. [L. scrupulosus: cf. F. scrupuleux.] 1. Full of
scruples; inclined to scruple; nicely doubtful; hesitating to determine
or to act, from a fear of offending or of doing wrong.

    Abusing their liberty, to the offense of their weak brethren which
    were scrupulous.


Hooker.

2. Careful; cautious; exact; nice; as, scrupulous abstinence from
labor; scrupulous performance of duties.

3. Given to making objections; captious. [Obs.]

    Equality of two domestic powers Breed scrupulous faction.


Shak.

4. Liable to be doubted; doubtful; nice. [Obs.]

    The justice of that cause ought to be evident; not obscure, not
    scrupulous.


Bacon.

Syn. -- Cautious; careful; conscientious; hesitating.

-- Scru"pu*lous*ly, adv. -- Scru"pu*lous*ness, n.

Scru"ta*ble (?), a. Discoverable by scrutiny, inquiry, or critical
examination. [R.] Dr. H. More.

Scru*ta"tion (?), n. [L. scrutatio.] Search; scrutiny. [Obs.]

||Scru*ta"tor (?), n. [L.] One who scrutinizes; a close examiner or
||inquirer. Ayliffe.

Scru`ti*neer (?), n. A scrutinizer; specifically, an examiner of votes,
as at an election.

Scru"ti*nize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scrutinized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scrutinizing (?).] [From Scrutiny.] To examine closely; to inspect or
observe with critical attention; to regard narrowly; as, to scrutinize
the measures of administration; to scrutinize the conduct or motives of
individuals.

    Whose votes they were obliged to scrutinize.


Ayliffe.

    Those pronounced him youngest who scrutinized his face the closest.


G. W. Cable.

Scru"ti*nize, v. i. To make scrutiny.

Scru"ti*ni`zer (?), n. One who scrutinizes.

Scru"ti*nous (?), a. Closely examining, or inquiring; careful; strict.
-- Scru"ti*nous*ly, adv.

Scru"ti*ny (?), n. [L. scrutinium, fr. scrutari to search carefully,
originally, to search even to the rags, fr. scruta trash, trumpery;
perhaps akin to E. shred: cf. AS. scrudnian to make scrutiny.] 1. Close
examination; minute inspection; critical observation.

    They that have designed exactness and deep scrutiny have taken some
    one part of nature.


Sir M. Hale.

    Thenceforth I thought thee worth my nearer view And narrower
    scrutiny.


Milton.

2. (Anc. Church) An examination of catechumens, in the last week of
Lent, who were to receive baptism on Easter Day.

3. (Canon Law) A ticket, or little paper billet, on which a vote is
written.

4. (Parliamentary Practice) An examination by a committee of the votes
given at an election, for the purpose of correcting the poll. Brande &
C.

Scru"ti*ny, v. t. To scrutinize. [Obs.]

Scru*toire" (?), n. [OF. escritoire. See Escritoire.] A escritoire; a
writing desk.

Scruze (?), v. t. [Cf. Excruciate.] To squeeze, compress, crush, or
bruise. [Obs. or Low] Spenser.

Scry (?), v. t. To descry. [Obs.] Spenser.

Scry, n. [From Scry, v.] A flock of wild fowl.

Scry, n. [OE. ascrie, fr. ascrien to cry out, fr. OF. escrier, F.
s'écrier. See Ex-, and Cry.] A cry or shout. [Obs.] Ld. Berners.

Scud (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scudded; p. pr. & vb. n. Scudding.] [Dan.
skyde to shoot, shove, push, akin to skud shot, gunshot, a shoot, young
bough, and to E. shoot. &radic;159. See Shoot.] 1. To move swiftly;
especially, to move as if driven forward by something.

    The first nautilus that scudded upon the glassy surface of warm
    primeval oceans.


I. Taylor.

    The wind was high; the vast white clouds scudded over the blue
    heaven.


Beaconsfield.

2. (Naut.) To be driven swiftly, or to run, before a gale, with little
or no sail spread.

Scud, v. t. To pass over quickly. [R.] Shenstone.

Scud, n. 1. The act of scudding; a driving along; a rushing with
precipitation.

2. Loose, vapory clouds driven swiftly by the wind.

    Borne on the scud of the sea.


Longfellow.

    The scud was flying fast above us, throwing a veil over the moon.


Sir S. Baker.

3. A slight, sudden shower. [Prov. Eng.] Wright.

4. (Zoöl.) A small flight of larks, or other birds, less than a flock.
[Prov. Eng.]

5. (Zoöl.) Any swimming amphipod crustacean.

Storm scud. See the Note under Cloud.

Scud"dle (?), v. i. [Freq. of scud: cf. Scuttle to hurry.] To run
hastily; to hurry; to scuttle.

||Scu"do (?), n.; pl. Scudi (#). [It., a crown, a dollar, a shield, fr.
||L. scutum a shield. Cf. Scute.] (Com.) (a) A silver coin, and money
||of account, used in Italy and Sicily, varying in value, in different
||parts, but worth about 4 shillings sterling, or about 96 cents; also,
||a gold coin worth about the same. (b) A gold coin of Rome, worth 64
||shillings 11 pence sterling, or about $ 15.70.

Scuff (?), n. [Cf. D. schoft shoulder, Goth. skuft hair of the head.
Cf. Scruff.] The back part of the neck; the scruff. [Prov. Eng.] Ld.
Lytton.

Scuff, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scuffed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scuffing.] [See
Scuffle.] To walk without lifting the feet; to proceed with a scraping
or dragging movement; to shuffle.

Scuf"fle (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Scuffled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scuffling (?).] [Freq. of scuff, v.i.; cf. Sw. skuffa to push, shove,
skuff a push, Dan. skuffe a drawer, a shovel, and E. shuffle, shove.
See Shove, and cf. Shuffle.] 1. To strive or struggle with a close
grapple; to wrestle in a rough fashion.

2. Hence, to strive or contend tumultuously; to struggle confusedly or
at haphazard.

    A gallant man had rather fight to great disadvantage in the field,
    in an orderly way, than scuffle with an undisciplined rabble.


Eikon Basilike.

Scuf"fle, n. 1. A rough, haphazard struggle, or trial of strength; a
disorderly wrestling at close quarters.

2. Hence, a confused contest; a tumultuous struggle for superiority; a
fight.

    The dog leaps upon the serpent, and tears it to pieces; but in the
    scuffle the cradle happened to be overturned.


L'Estrange.

3. A child's pinafore or bib. [Prov. Eng.]

4. A garden hoe. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Scuf"fler (?), n. 1. One who scuffles.

2. An agricultural implement resembling a scarifier, but usually
lighter.

Scug (skg), v. i. [Cf. Dan. skygge to darken, a shade, SW. skugga to
shade, a shade, Icel. skyggja to shade, skuggi a shade.] To hide.
[Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Scug, n. A place of shelter; the declivity of a hill. [Prov. Eng.]
Halliwell.

{ Sculk (sklk), Sculk"er (-r) }. See Skulk, Skulker.

Scull (skl), n. (Anat.) The skull. [Obs.]

Scull, n. [See 1st School.] A shoal of fish. Milton.

Scull, n. [Of uncertain origin; cf. Icel. skola to wash.] 1. (Naut.)
(a) A boat; a cockboat. See Sculler. (b) One of a pair of short oars
worked by one person. (c) A single oar used at the stern in propelling
a boat.

2. (Zoöl.) The common skua gull. [Prov. Eng.]

Scull, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sculled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sculling.]
(Naut.) To impel (a boat) with a pair of sculls, or with a single scull
or oar worked over the stern obliquely from side to side.

Scull, v. i. To impel a boat with a scull or sculls.

Scull"er (?), n. 1. A boat rowed by one man with two sculls, or short
oars. [R.] Dryden.

2. One who sculls.

Scul"ler*y (skl"lr*), n.; pl. Sculleries (- z). [Probably originally, a
place for washing dishes, and for swillery, fr. OE. swilen to wash, AS.
swilian (see Swill to wash, to drink), but influenced either by Icel.
skola, skyla, Dan. skylle, or by OF. escuelier a place for keeping
dishes, fr. escuele a dish, F. écuelle, fr. L. scutella a salver,
waiter (cf. Scuttle a basket); or perhaps the English word is
immediately from the OF. escuelier; cf. OE. squyllare a dishwasher.] 1.
A place where dishes, kettles, and culinary utensils, are cleaned and
kept; also, a room attached to the kitchen, where the coarse work is
done; a back kitchen.

2. Hence, refuse; fifth; offal. [Obs.] Gauden.

Scul"lion (skl"yn), n. (Bot.) A scallion.

Scul"lion, n. [OF. escouillon (Cot.) a dishclout, apparently for
escouvillon, F. écouvillon a swab; cf. also OF. souillon a servant
employed for base offices. Cf. Scovel.] A servant who cleans pots and
kettles, and does other menial services in the kitchen.

    The meanest scullion that followed his camp.


South.

Scul"lion*ly, a. Like a scullion; base. [Obs.] Milton.

Sculp (?), v. t. [See Sculptor.] To sculpture; to carve; to engrave.
[Obs. or Humorous.] Sandys.

Scul"pin (?), n. [Written also skulpin.] (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of
numerous species of marine cottoid fishes of the genus Cottus, or
Acanthocottus, having a large head armed with several sharp spines, and
a broad mouth. They are generally mottled with yellow, brown, and
black. Several species are found on the Atlantic coasts of Europe and
America. (b) A large cottoid market fish of California (Scorpænichthys
marmoratus); -- called also bighead, cabezon, scorpion, salpa. (c) The
dragonet, or yellow sculpin, of Europe (Callionymus lyra).

The name is also applied to other related California species.

Deep-water sculpin, the sea raven.

Sculp"tile (?), a. [L. sculptilis. See Sculptor.] Formed by carving;
graven; as, sculptile images. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sculp"tor (?), n. [L. sculptor, fr. sculpere, sculptum, to carve; cf.
scalpere to cut, carve, scratch, and Gr. &?; to carve: cf. F.
sculpteur.] 1. One who sculptures; one whose occupation is to carve
statues, or works of sculpture.

2. Hence, an artist who designs works of sculpture, his first studies
and his finished model being usually in a plastic material, from which
model the marble is cut, or the bronze is cast.

Sculp"tress (?), n. A female sculptor.

Sculp"tur*al (?; 135), a. Of or pertaining to sculpture. G. Eliot.

Sculp"ture (?; 135), n. [L. sculptura: cf. F. sculpture.] 1. The art of
carving, cutting, or hewing wood, stone, metal, etc., into statues,
ornaments, etc., or into figures, as of men, or other things; hence,
the art of producing figures and groups, whether in plastic or hard
materials.

2. Carved work modeled of, or cut upon, wood, stone, metal, etc.

    There, too, in living sculpture, might be seen The mad affection of
    the Cretan queen.


Dryden.

Sculp"ture (?; 135), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sculptured (&?;); p. pr. & vb.
n. Sculpturing.] To form with the chisel on, in, or from, wood, stone,
or metal; to carve; to engrave.

Sculptured tortoise (Zoöl.), a common North American wood tortoise
(Glyptemys insculpta). The shell is marked with strong grooving and
ridges which resemble sculptured figures.

Sculp`tur*esque" (?), a. After the manner of sculpture; resembling, or
relating to, sculpture.

Scum (skm), n. [Of Scand. origin; cf. Dan. & Sw. skum, Icel. skm, LG.
schum, D. schuim, OHG. scm, G. schaum; probably from a root meaning, to
cover. &radic;158. Cf. Hide skin, Meerschaum, Skim, v., Sky.]

1. The extraneous matter or impurities which rise to the surface of
liquids in boiling or fermentation, or which form on the surface by
other means; also, the scoria of metals in a molten state; dross.

    Some to remove the scum as it did rise.


Spenser.

2. refuse; recrement; anything vile or worthless.

    The great and innocent are insulted by the scum and refuse of the
    people.


Addison.

Scum, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scummed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scumming (?).]
1. To take the scum from; to clear off the impure matter from the
surface of; to skim.

    You that scum the molten lead.


Dryden & Lee.

2. To sweep or range over the surface of. [Obs.]

    Wandering up and down without certain seat, they lived by scumming
    those seas and shores as pirates.


Milton.

Scum, v. i. To form a scum; to become covered with scum. Also used
figuratively.

    Life, and the interest of life, have stagnated and scummed over.


A. K. H. Boyd.

Scum"ber (?), v. i. [Cf. Discumber.] To void excrement. [Obs. or Prov.
Eng.] Massinger.

Scum"ber, n. Dung. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Scum"ble (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scumbled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scumbling (?).] [Freq. of scum. &radic; 158.] (Fine Arts) To cover
lighty, as a painting, or a drawing, with a thin wash of opaque color,
or with color-crayon dust rubbed on with the stump, or to make any
similar additions to the work, so as to produce a softened effect.

Scum"bling (?), n. 1. (Fine Arts) (a) A mode of obtaining a softened
effect, in painting and drawing, by the application of a thin layer of
opaque color to the surface of a painting, or part of the surface,
which is too bright in color, or which requires harmonizing. (b) In
crayon drawing, the use of the stump.

2. The color so laid on. Also used figuratively.

    Shining above the brown scumbling of leafless orchards.


L. Wallace.

Scum"mer (?), v. i. To scumber. [Obs.] Holland.

Scum"mer, n. Excrement; scumber. [Obs.]

Scum"mer, n. [Cf. OF. escumoire, F. écumoire. See Scum, and cf.
Skimmer.] An instrument for taking off scum; a skimmer.

Scum"ming (?), n. (a) The act of taking off scum. (b) That which is
scummed off; skimmings; scum; -- used chiefly in the plural.

Scum"my (?), a. Covered with scum; of the nature of scum. Sir P.
Sidney.

Scun"ner (?), v. t. [Cf. Shun.] To cause to loathe, or feel disgust at.
[Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

Scun"ner, v. i. To have a feeling of loathing or disgust; hence, to
have dislike, prejudice, or reluctance. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.] C.
Kingsley.

Scun"ner, n. A feeling of disgust or loathing; a strong prejudice;
abhorrence; as, to take a scunner against some one. [Scot. & Prov.
Eng.] Carlyle.

Scup (?), n. [D. schop.] A swing. [Local, U.S.]

Scup, n. [Contr. fr. American Indian mishcùp, fr. mishe-kuppi large,
thick-scaled.] (Zoöl.) A marine sparoid food fish (Stenotomus chrysops,
or S. argyrops), common on the Atlantic coast of the United States. It
appears bright silvery when swimming in the daytime, but shows broad
blackish transverse bands at night and when dead. Called also porgee,
paugy, porgy, scuppaug.

The same names are also applied to a closely allied Southern species
(Stenotomus Gardeni).

Scup"paug (?), n. [Contr. fr. Amer. Indian mishcuppauog, pl. of
mishcup.] (Zoöl.) See 2d Scup.

Scup"per (?), n. [OF. escopir, escupir, to spit, perhaps for escospir,
L. ex + conspuere to spit upon; pref. con- + spuere to spit. Cf. Spit,
v.] (Naut.) An opening cut through the waterway and bulwarks of a ship,
so that water falling on deck may flow overboard; -- called also
scupper hole.

Scupper hose (Naut.), a pipe of leather, canvas, etc., attached to the
mouth of the scuppers, on the outside of a vessel, to prevent the water
from entering. Totten. -- Scupper nail (Naut.), a nail with a very
broad head, for securing the edge of the hose to the scupper. --
Scupper plug (Naut.), a plug to stop a scupper. Totten.

Scup"per*nong (skp"pr*nng), n. [Probably of American Indian origin.]
(Bot.) An American grape, a form of Vitis vulpina, found in the
Southern Atlantic States, and often cultivated.

Scur (skûr), v. i. [Cf. Scour to run.] To move hastily; to scour. [Obs.
or Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Scurf (?), n. [AS. scurf, sceorf, or from Scand.; cf. Sw. skorf, Dan.
skurv, Icel. skurfur, D. schurft, G. schorf; all akin to AS. scurf, and
to AS. sceorfan to scrape, to gnaw, G. schürfen to scrape, and probably
also to E. scrape. Cf. Scurvy.] 1. Thin dry scales or scabs upon the
body; especially, thin scales exfoliated from the cuticle, particularly
of the scalp; dandruff.

2. Hence, the foul remains of anything adherent.

    The scurf is worn away of each committed crime.


Dryden.

3. Anything like flakes or scales adhering to a surface.

    There stood a hill not far, whose grisly top Belched fire and
    rolling smoke; the rest entire Shone with a glossy scurf.


Milton.

4. (Bot.) Minute membranous scales on the surface of some leaves, as in
the goosefoot. Gray.

Scurff (?), n. The bull trout. [Prov. Eng.]

Scurf"i*ness, n. 1. Quality or state of being scurfy.

2. (Bot.) Scurf.

Scurf"y (?), a. [Compar. Scurfier (?); superl. Scurfiest.] Having or
producing scurf; covered with scurf; resembling scurf.

Scur"ri*er (?), n. One who scurries.

Scur"rile (?), a. [L. scurrilis, fr. scurra a *buffoon, jester: cf. F.
scurrile.] Such as befits a buffoon or vulgar jester; grossly
opprobrious or loudly jocose in language; scurrilous; as, scurrile
taunts.

    The wretched affectation of scurrile laughter.


Cowley.

    A scurrile or obscene jest will better advance you at the court of
    Charles than your father's ancient name.


Sir W. Scott.

Scur*ril"i*ty (?), n. [L. scurrilitas: cf. F. scurrilité.] 1. The
quality or state of being scurrile or scurrilous; mean, vile, or
obscene jocularity.

    Your reasons . . . have been sharp and sententious, pleasant
    without scurrility.


Shak.

2. That which is scurrile or scurrilous; gross or obscene language; low
buffoonery; vulgar abuse.

    Interrupting prayers and sermons with clamor and scurrility.


Macaulay.

Syn. -- Scurrilousness; abuse; insolence; vulgarity; indecency.

Scur"ril*ous (?), a. [See Scurrile.] 1. Using the low and indecent
language of the meaner sort of people, or such as only the license of
buffoons can warrant; as, a scurrilous fellow.

2. Containing low indecency or abuse; mean; foul; vile; obscenely
jocular; as, scurrilous language.

    The absurd and scurrilous sermon which had very unwisely been
    honored with impeachment.


Macaulay.

Syn. -- Opprobrious; abusive; reproachful; insulting; insolent;
offensive; gross; vile; vulgar; low; foul; foul-mouthed; indecent;
scurrile; mean.

-- Scur"ril*ous*ly, adv. -- Scur"ril*ous*ness, n.

Scur"rit (?), n. (Zoöl.) The lesser tern (Sterna minuta). [Prov. Eng.]

Scur"ry (?), v. i. [Cf. Scur, Skirr.] To hasten away or along; to move
rapidly; to hurry; as, the rabbit scurried away.

Scur"ry, n. Act of scurrying; hurried movement.

Scur"vi*ly (?), adv. In a scurvy manner.

Scur"vi*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being scurvy; vileness;
meanness.

Scur"vy (?), a. [Compar. Scurvier (?); superl. Scurviest.] [From Scurf;
cf. Scurvy, n.] 1. Covered or affected with scurf or scabs; scabby;
scurfy; specifically, diseased with the scurvy. "Whatsoever man . . .
be scurvy or scabbed." Lev. xxi. 18, 20.

2. Vile; mean; low; vulgar; contemptible. "A scurvy trick." Ld. Lytton.

    That scurvy custom of taking tobacco.


Swift.

    [He] spoke spoke such scurvy and provoking terms.


Shak.

Scur"vy, n. [Probably from the same source as scorbute, but influenced
by scurf, scurfy, scurvy, adj.; cf. D. scheurbuik scurvy, G. scharbock,
LL. scorbutus. Cf. Scorbute.] (Med.) A disease characterized by livid
spots, especially about the thighs and legs, due to extravasation of
blood, and by spongy gums, and bleeding from almost all the mucous
membranes. It is accompanied by paleness, languor, depression, and
general debility. It is occasioned by confinement, innutritious food,
and hard labor, but especially by lack of fresh vegetable food, or
confinement for a long time to a limited range of food, which is
incapable of repairing the waste of the system. It was formerly
prevalent among sailors and soldiers.

Scurvy grass [Scurvy + grass; or cf. Icel. skarfakl scurvy grass.]
(Bot.) A kind of cress (Cochlearia officinalis) growing along the
seacoast of Northern Europe and in arctic regions. It is a remedy for
the scurvy, and has proved a valuable food to arctic explorers. The
name is given also to other allied species of plants.

Scut (?), n. [Cf. Icel. skott a fox's tail. &radic; 159.] [Obs.] The
tail of a hare, or of a deer, or other animal whose tail is short, esp.
when carried erect; hence, sometimes, the animal itself. "He ran like a
scut." Skelton.

    How the Indian hare came to have a long tail, whereas that part in
    others attains no higher than a scut.


Sir T. Browne.

    My doe with the black scut.


Shak.

||Scu"ta (?), n. pl. See Scutum.

Scu"tage (?; 48), n. [LL. scutagium, from L. scutum a shield.] (Eng.
Hist.) Shield money; commutation of service for a sum of money. See
Escuage.

Scu"tal (?), a. Of or pertaining to a shield.

    A good example of these scutal monstrosities.


Cussans.

Scu"tate (?), a. [L. scutatus armed with a shield, from scutum a
shield.] 1. Buckler-shaped; round or nearly round.

2. (Zoöl.) Protected or covered by bony or horny plates, or large
scales.

Scutch (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scutched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Scutching.] [See Scotch to cut slightly.] 1. To beat or whip; to drub.
[Old or Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

2. To separate the woody fiber from (flax, hemp, etc.) by beating; to
swingle.

3. To loosen and dress the fiber of (cotton or silk) by beating; to
free (fibrous substances) from dust by beating and blowing.

Scutching machine, a machine used to scutch cotton, silk, or flax; --
called also batting machine.

Scutch, n. 1. A wooden instrument used in scutching flax and hemp.

2. The woody fiber of flax; the refuse of scutched flax. "The smoke of
the burning scutch." Cuthbert Bede.

Scutch"eon (?), n. [Aphetic form of escutcheon.] 1. An escutcheon; an
emblazoned shield. Bacon.

    The corpse lay in state, with all the pomp of scutcheons, wax
    lights, black hangings, and mutes.


Macaulay.

2. A small plate of metal, as the shield around a keyhole. See
Escutcheon, 4.

Scutch"eoned (?), a. Emblazoned on or as a shield.

    Scutcheoned panes in cloisters old.


Lowell.

Scutch"er (?), n. 1. One who scutches.

2. An implement or machine for scutching hemp, flax, or cotton, etc.; a
scutch; a scutching machine.

Scutch" grass` (?). (Bot.) A kind of pasture grass (Cynodon Dactylon).
See Bermuda grass: also Illustration in Appendix.

Scute (?), n. [L. scutum a shield, a buckler. See Scudo.] 1. A small
shield. [Obs.] Skelton.

2. An old French gold coin of the value of 3s. 4d. sterling, or about
80 cents.

3. (Zoöl.) A bony scale of a reptile or fish; a large horny scale on
the leg of a bird, or on the belly of a snake.

||Scu*tel"la (?), n. pl. See Scutellum.

||Scu*tel"la, n.; pl. Scutellæ (#). [NL., fem. dim. of L. scutum.]
||(Zoöl.) See Scutellum, n., 2.

{ Scu"tel*late (?), Scu"tel*la`ted (?) }, a. [L. scutella a dish,
salver. Cf. Scuttle a basket.] 1. (Zoöl.) Formed like a plate or
salver; composed of platelike surfaces; as, the scutellated bone of a
sturgeon. Woodward.

2. [See Scutellum.] (Zoöl.) Having the tarsi covered with broad
transverse scales, or scutella; -- said of certain birds.

Scu`tel*la"tion (?), n. (Zoöl.) The entire covering, or mode of
arrangement, of scales, as on the legs and feet of a bird.

Scu*tel"li*form (?), a. [L. scutella a dish + -form.] 1. Scutellate.

2. (Bot.) Having the form of a scutellum.

Scu*tel`li*plan"tar (?), a. [L. scutellus a shield + planta foot.]
(Zoöl.) Having broad scutella on the front, and small scales on the
posterior side, of the tarsus; -- said of certain birds.

||Scu*tel"lum (?), n.; pl. Scutella (#). [NL., neut. dim. of L. scutum
||a shield.] 1. (Bot.) A rounded apothecium having an elevated rim
||formed of the proper thallus, the fructification of certain lichens.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The third of the four pieces forming the upper part of a
thoracic segment of an insect. It follows the scutum, and is followed
by the small postscutellum; a scutella. See Thorax. (b) One of the
transverse scales on the tarsi and toes of birds; a scutella.

Scu"ti*branch (?), a. (Zoöl.) Scutibranchiate. -- n. One of the
Scutibranchiata.

||Scu`ti*bran"chi*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) Same as Scutibranchiata.

Scu`ti*bran"chi*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of the Scutibranchiata.

||Scu`ti*bran`chi*a"ta (?), n. pl. [NL. See Scutum, and Branchia.]
||(Zoöl.) An order of gastropod Mollusca having a heart with two
||auricles and one ventricle. The shell may be either spiral or
||shieldlike.

It is now usually regarded as including only the Rhipidoglossa and the
Docoglossa. When originally established, it included a heterogenous
group of mollusks having shieldlike shells, such as Haliotis,
Fissurella, Carinaria, etc.

Scu`ti*bran"chi*ate (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the gills protected by a
shieldlike shell; of or pertaining to the Scutibranchiata. -- n. One of
the Scutibranchiata.

Scu*tif"er*ous (?), a. [L. scutum shield + -ferous.] Carrying a shield
or buckler.

Scu"ti*form (?), a. [L. scutum shield + -form: cf. F. scutiforme.]
Shield-shaped; scutate.

||Scu"ti*ger (?), n. [NL., fr. L. scutum shield + gerere to bear.]
||(Zoöl.) Any species of chilopod myriapods of the genus Scutigera.
||They sometimes enter buildings and prey upon insects.

Scu"ti*ped (?), a. [L. scutum a shield + pes, pedis, a foot: cf. F.
scutipède.] (Zoöl.) Having the anterior surface of the tarsus covered
with scutella, or transverse scales, in the form of incomplete bands
terminating at a groove on each side; -- said of certain birds.

Scut"tle (?), n. [AS. scutel a dish, platter; cf. Icel. skutill; both
fr. L. scutella, dim. of scutra, scuta, a dish or platter; cf. scutum a
shield. Cf. Skillet.] 1. A broad, shallow basket.

2. A wide-mouthed vessel for holding coal: a coal hod.

Scut"tle, v. i. [For scuddle, fr. scud.] To run with affected
precipitation; to hurry; to bustle; to scuddle.

    With the first dawn of day, old Janet was scuttling about the house
    to wake the baron.


Sir W. Scott.

Scut"tle, n. A quick pace; a short run. Spectator.

Scut"tle (?), n. [OF. escoutille, F. éscoutille, cf. Sp. escotilla;
probably akin to Sp. escotar to cut a thing so as to make it fit, to
hollow a garment about the neck, perhaps originally, to cut a
bosom-shaped piece out, and of Teutonic origin; cf. D. schoot lap,
bosom, G. schoss, Goth. skauts the hem of a garnment. Cf. Sheet an
expanse.] 1. A small opening in an outside wall or covering, furnished
with a lid. Specifically: (a) (Naut.) A small opening or hatchway in
the deck of a ship, large enough to admit a man, and with a lid for
covering it, also, a like hole in the side or bottom of a ship. (b) An
opening in the roof of a house, with a lid.

2. The lid or door which covers or closes an opening in a roof, wall,
or the like.

Scuttle butt, or Scuttle cask (Naut.), a butt or cask with a large hole
in it, used to contain the fresh water for daily use in a ship. Totten.

Scut"tle, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Scuttled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Scuttling.]
1. To cut a hole or holes through the bottom, deck, or sides of (as of
a ship), for any purpose.

2. To sink by making holes through the bottom of; as, to scuttle a
ship.

||Scu"tum (?), n.; pl. Scuta (#). [L.] 1. (Rom. Antiq.) An oblong
||shield made of boards or wickerwork covered with leather, with
||sometimes an iron rim; -- carried chiefly by the heavy-armed
||infantry.

2. (O. Eng. Law) A penthouse or awning. [Obs.] Burrill.

3. (Zoöl.) (a) The second and largest of the four parts forming the
upper surface of a thoracic segment of an insect. It is preceded by the
prescutum and followed by the scutellum. See the Illust. under Thorax.
(b) One of the two lower valves of the operculum of a barnacle.

||Scyb"a*la (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. sky`balon dung.] (Med.) Hardened
||masses of feces.

Scye (s), n. Arm scye, a cutter's term for the armhole or part of the
armhole of the waist of a garment. [Cant]

Scyle (sl), v. t. [AS. scylan to withdraw or remove.] To hide; to
secrete; to conceal. [Obs.]

Scyl"la (?), n. A dangerous rock on the Italian coast opposite the
whirpool Charybdis on the coast of Sicily, -- both personified in
classical literature as ravenous monsters. The passage between them was
formerly considered perilous; hence, the saying "Between Scylla and
Charybdis," signifying a great peril on either hand.

||Scyl*læ"a (?), n. [NL. See Scylla.] (Zoöl.) A genus of oceanic
||nudibranchiate mollusks having the small branched gills situated on
||the upper side of four fleshy lateral lobes, and on the median caudal
||crest.

In color and form these mollusks closely imitate the fronds of
sargassum and other floating seaweeds among which they live.

Scyl*la"ri*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of a family (Scyllaridæ) of macruran
Crustacea, remarkable for the depressed form of the body, and the
broad, flat antennæ. Also used adjectively.

Scyl"lite (?), n. (Chem.) A white crystalline substance of a sweetish
taste, resembling inosite and metameric with dextrose. It is extracted
from the kidney of the dogfish (of the genus Scyllium), the shark, and
the skate.

Scym"e*tar (?), n. See Scimiter.

||Scy"pha (?), n.; pl. Scyphae (#). [NL.] (Bot.) See Scyphus, 2 (b).

Scy"phi*form (?), a. [L. scyphus a cup + -form.] (Bot.) Cup-shaped.

||Scy*phis"to*ma (?), n.; pl. Scyphistomata (#), Scyphistomæ (#). [NL.,
||fr. Gr. sky`fos a cup + sto`ma the mouth.] (Zoöl.) The young attached
||larva of Discophora in the stage when it resembles a hydroid, or
||actinian.

||Scy`pho*bran"chi*i (?), n. pl. [NL., from Gr. sky`fos a cup +
||bra`gchion a gill.] (Zoöl.) An order of fishes including the
||blennioid and gobioid fishes, and other related families.

||Scy`pho*me*du"sæ (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. sky`fos cup + NL. medusa.]
||(Zoöl.) Same as Acraspeda, or Discophora.

||Scy*phoph"o*ri (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. sky`fos a cup + fe`rein to
||bear.] (Zoöl.) An order of fresh-water fishes inhabiting tropical
||Africa. They have rudimentary electrical organs on each side of the
||tail.

Scy"phus (?), n.; pl. Scyphi (#). [L., a cup, Gr. sky`fos.] 1. (Antiq.)
A kind of large drinking cup, -- used by Greeks and Romans, esp. by
poor folk.

2. (Bot.) (a) The cup of a narcissus, or a similar appendage to the
corolla in other flowers. (b) A cup-shaped stem or podetium in lichens.
Also called scypha. See Illust. of Cladonia pyxidata, under Lichen.

Scythe (s), n. [OE. sithe, AS. sðe, sigðe; akin to Icel. sigðr a
sickle, LG. segd, seged, seed, seid, OHG. segansa sickle, scythe, G.
sense scythe, and to E. saw a cutting instrument. See Saw.] [Written
also sithe and sythe.] 1. An instrument for mowing grass, grain, or the
like, by hand, composed of a long, curving blade, with a sharp edge,
made fast to a long handle, called a snath, which is bent into a form
convenient for use.

    The sharp-edged scythe shears up the spiring grass.


Drayton.

    Whatever thing The scythe of Time mows down.


Milton.

2. (Antiq.) A scythe-shaped blade attached to ancient war chariots.

Scythe (?), v. t. To cut with a scythe; to cut off as with a scythe; to
mow. [Obs.]

    Time had not scythed all that youth begun.


Shak.

Scythed (?), a. Armed with scythes, as a chariot.

    Chariots scythed, On thundering axles rolled.


Glover.

Scythe"man (?), n.; pl. Scythemen (&?;). One who uses a scythe; a
mower. Macaulay.

Scythe"stone` (?), n. A stone for sharpening scythes; a whetstone.

Scythe"whet` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Wilson's thrush; -- so called from its
note. [Local, U.S.]

Scyth"i*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Scythia (a name given to the
northern part of Asia, and Europe adjoining to Asia), or its language
or inhabitants.

Scythian lamb. (Bot.) See Barometz.

Scyth"i*an, n. 1. A native or inhabitant of Scythia; specifically
(Ethnol.), one of a Slavonic race which in early times occupied Eastern
Europe.

2. The language of the Scythians.

||Scy`to*der"ma*ta (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a hide + &?; a skin.]
||(Zoöl.) Same as Holothurioidea.

Sdain (?), v. & n. Disdain. [Obs.] Spenser.

'Sdeath (?), interj. [Corrupted fr. God's death.] An exclamation
expressive of impatience or anger. Shak.

Sdeign (?), v. t. To disdain. [Obs.]

    But either sdeigns with other to partake.


Spenser.

Sea (s), n. [OE. see, AS. s; akin to D. zee, OS. & OHG. so, G. see,
OFries. se, Dan. sö, Sw. sjö, Icel. sær, Goth. saiws, and perhaps to L.
saevus fierce, savage. &radic;151a.] 1. One of the larger bodies of
salt water, less than an ocean, found on the earth's surface; a body of
salt water of second rank, generally forming part of, or connecting
with, an ocean or a larger sea; as, the Mediterranean Sea; the Sea of
Marmora; the North Sea; the Carribean Sea.

2. An inland body of water, esp. if large or if salt or brackish; as,
the Caspian Sea; the Sea of Aral; sometimes, a small fresh-water lake;
as, the Sea of Galilee.

3. The ocean; the whole body of the salt water which covers a large
part of the globe.

    I marvel how the fishes live in the sea.


Shak.

    Ambiguous between sea and land The river horse and scaly crocodile.


Milton.

4. The swell of the ocean or other body of water in a high wind; motion
or agitation of the water's surface; also, a single wave; a billow; as,
there was a high sea after the storm; the vessel shipped a sea.

5. (Jewish Antiq.) A great brazen laver in the temple at Jerusalem; --
so called from its size.

    He made a molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in
    compass, and five cubits the height thereof.


2 Chron. iv. 2.

6. Fig.: Anything resembling the sea in vastness; as, a sea of glory.
Shak.

    All the space . . . was one sea of heads.


Macaulay.

Sea is often used in the composition of words of obvious signification;
as, sea-bathed, sea-beaten, sea-bound, sea-bred, sea-circled, sealike,
sea-nursed, sea-tossed, sea-walled, sea- worn, and the like. It is also
used either adjectively or in combination with substantives; as, sea
bird, sea-bird, or seabird, sea acorn, or sea-acorn.

At sea, upon the ocean; away from land; figuratively, without landmarks
for guidance; lost; at the mercy of circumstances. "To say the old man
was at sea would be too feeble an expression." G. W. Cable -- At full
sea at the height of flood tide; hence, at the height. "But now God's
mercy was at full sea." Jer. Taylor. -- Beyond seas, or Beyond the sea
or the seas (Law), out of the state, territory, realm, or country.
Wharton. -- Half seas over, half drunk. [Colloq.] Spectator. -- Heavy
sea, a sea in which the waves run high. -- Long sea, a sea
characterized by the uniform and steady motion of long and extensive
waves. -- Short sea, a sea in which the waves are short, broken, and
irregular, so as to produce a tumbling or jerking motion. -- To go to
sea, to adopt the calling or occupation of a sailor.

Sea" a"corn (?). (Zoöl.) An acorn barnacle (Balanus).

Sea" ad"der (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The European fifteen-spined stickleback
(Gasterosteus spinachia); -- called also bismore. (b) The European
tanglefish, or pipefish (Syngnathus acus).

Sea" an"chor (?). (Naut.) See Drag sail, under 4th Drag.

Sea" a*nem"o*ne (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of soft-bodied
Anthozoa, belonging to the order Actinaria; an actinian.

They have the oral disk surrounded by one or more circles of simple
tapering tentacles, which are often very numerous, and when expanded
somewhat resemble the petals of flowers, with colors varied and often
very beautiful.

Sea" ape` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The thrasher shark. (b) The sea otter.

Sea" ap"ple (?). (Bot.) The fruit of a West Indian palm (Manicaria
Plukenetii), often found floating in the sea. A. Grisebach.

Sea" ar"row (?). (Zoöl.) A squid of the genus Ommastrephes. See Squid.

Sea" bank` (?). 1. The seashore. Shak.

2. A bank or mole to defend against the sea.

Sea"-bar` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A tern.

Sea" bar"row (?). (Zoöl.) A sea purse.

Sea" bass`. (&?;). (Zoöl.) (a) A large marine food fish (Serranus, or
Centropristis, atrarius) which abounds on the Atlantic coast of the
United States. It is dark bluish, with black bands, and more or less
varied with small white spots and blotches. Called also, locally, blue
bass, black sea bass, blackfish, bluefish, and black perch. (b) A
California food fish (Cynoscion nobile); -- called also white sea bass,
and sea salmon.

Sea" bat` (?). (Zoöl.) See Batfish (a).

Sea"beach` (?), n. A beach lying along the sea. "The bleak seabeach."
Longfellow.

Sea" bean (?). (Bot.) Same as Florida bean.

Sea" bear` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) Any fur seal. See under Fur. (b) The white
bear.

Sea"beard` (?), n. (Bot.) A green seaweed (Cladophora rupestris)
growing in dense tufts.

Sea" beast` (?). (Zoöl.) Any large marine mammal, as a seal, walrus, or
cetacean.

Sea" bird` (?). (Zoöl.) Any swimming bird frequenting the sea; a sea
fowl.

Sea" blite` (?). (Bot.) A plant (Suæda maritima) of the Goosefoot
family, growing in salt marshes.

Sea"-blub"ber (?), n. (Zoöl.) A jellyfish.

Sea"board` (?), n. [Sea + board, F. bord side.] The seashore; seacoast.
Ld. Berners.

Sea"board`, a. Bordering upon, or being near, the sea; seaside;
seacoast; as, a seaboard town.

Sea"board`, adv. Toward the sea. [R.]

Sea"boat` (?). [AS. sbt.] 1. A boat or vessel adapted to the open sea;
hence, a vessel considered with reference to her power of resisting a
storm, or maintaining herself in a heavy sea; as, a good sea boat.

2. (Zoöl.) A chiton.

Sea"bord` (?), n. & a. See Seaboard.

Sea"-bor"der*ing (?), a. Bordering on the sea; situated beside the sea.
Drayton.

Sea"-born` (?), a. 1. Born of the sea; produced by the sea. "Neptune
and his sea-born niece." Waller.

2. Born at sea.

Sea"bound` (?), a. Bounded by the sea.

Sea" bow` (?). See Marine rainbow, under Rainbow.

Sea" boy` (?). A boy employed on shipboard.

Sea" breach` (?). A breaking or overflow of a bank or a dike by the
sea. L'Estrange.

Sea" bream` (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of sparoid fishes,
especially the common European species (Pagellus centrodontus), the
Spanish (P. Oweni), and the black sea bream (Cantharus lineatus); --
called also old wife.

Sea" brief` (?). Same as Sea letter.

Sea" bug` (?). (Zoöl.) A chiton.

Sea"-built` (?), a. Built at, in, or by the sea.

Sea" but"ter*fly` (?). (Zoöl.) A pteropod.

Sea" cab"bage (?; 48). (Bot.) See Sea kale, under Kale.

Sea" calf` (?). (Zoöl.) The common seal.

Sea" ca*na"ry (?). [So called from a whistling sound which it makes.]
(Zoöl.) The beluga, or white whale.

Sea" cap"tain (?). The captain of a vessel that sails upon the sea.

Sea" card` (?). Mariner's card, or compass.

{ Sea" cat`fish (?). Sea" cat` (?). } (Zoöl.) (a) The wolf fish. (b)
Any marine siluroid fish, as Ælurichthys marinus, and Arinus felis, of
the eastern coast of the United States. Many species are found on the
coasts of Central and South America.

Sea" chart` (?). A chart or map on which the lines of the shore,
islands, shoals, harbors, etc., are delineated.

Sea" chick"weed` (?). (Bot.) A fleshy plant (Arenaria peploides)
growing in large tufts in the sands of the northern Atlantic seacoast;
-- called also sea sandwort, and sea purslane.

Sea" clam` (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of the large bivalve mollusks found on
the open seacoast, especially those of the family Mactridæ, as the
common American species. (Mactra, or Spisula, solidissima); -- called
also beach clam, and surf clam.

Sea" coal` (?). Coal brought by sea; -- a name by which mineral coal
was formerly designated in the south of England, in distinction from
charcoal, which was brought by land.

Sea-coal facing (Founding), facing consisting of pulverized bituminous
coal.

Sea"coast` (?), n. The shore or border of the land adjacent to the sea
or ocean. Also used adjectively.

Sea" cob` (?). (Zoöl.) The black-backed gull.

Sea" cock` (?). 1. In a steamship, a cock or valve close to the
vessel's side, for closing a pipe which communicates with the sea.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The black-bellied plover. (b) A gurnard, as the European
red gurnard (Trigla pini).

Sea" co"coa (?). (Bot.) A magnificent palm (Lodoicea Sechellarum) found
only in the Seychelles Islands. The fruit is an immense two-lobed nut.
It was found floating in the Indian Ocean before the tree was known,
and called sea cocoanut, and double cocoanut.

Sea" col"an*der (?). (Bot.) A large blackfish seaweed (Agarum Turneri),
the frond of which is punctured with many little holes.

Sea" cole"wort` (?). (Bot.) Sea cabbage.

Sea" com"pass (?). The mariner's compass. See under Compass.

Sea" coot` (?). (Zoöl.) A scoter duck.

Sea" corn` (?). (Zoöl.) A yellow cylindrical mass of egg capsules of
certain species of whelks (Buccinum), which resembles an ear of maize.

Sea" cow` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The mantee. (b) The dugong. (c) The walrus.

{ Sea" craw"fish` (?). Sea" cray"fish` (?). } (Zoöl.) Any crustacean of
the genus Palinurus and allied genera, as the European spiny lobster
(P. vulgaris), which is much used as an article of food. See Lobster.

Sea" crow` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The chough. [Ireland] (b) The cormorant.
(c) The blackheaded pewit, and other gulls. (d) The skua. (e) The
razorbill. [Orkney Islands] (f) The coot.

Sea" cu"cum*ber (?). (Zoöl.) Any large holothurian, especially one of
those belonging to the genus Pentacta, or Cucumaria, as the common
American and European species. (P. frondosa).

Sea" dace` (?). (Zoöl.) The European sea perch.

Sea" daf"fo*dil (?). (Bot.) A European amaryllidaceous plant
(Pancratium maritimum).

Sea" dev`il (?) (Zoöl.) (a) Any very large ray, especially any species
of the genus Manta or Cephaloptera, some of which become more than
twenty feet across and weigh several tons. See also Ox ray, under Ox.
(b) Any large cephalopod, as a large Octopus, or a giant squid
(Architeuthis). See Devilfish. (c) The angler.

Sea" dog` (?). 1. (Zoöl.) The dogfish. (b) The common seal.

2. An old sailor; a salt. [Colloq.]

Sea" dot"ter*el (?). (Zoöl.) The turnstone.

Sea" dove` (?). (Zoöl.) The little auk, or rotche. See Illust. of
Rotche.

Sea" drag"on (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A dragonet, or sculpin. (b) The pegasus.

Sea" drake` (?). (Zoöl.) The pewit gull.

Sea" duck` (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of ducks which
frequent the seacoasts and feed mainly on fishes and mollusks. The
scoters, eiders, old squaw, and ruddy duck are examples. They may be
distinguished by the lobate hind toe.

Sea" ea"gle (?). 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of fish-eating
eagles of the genus Haliæetus and allied genera, as the North Pacific
sea eagle (H. pelagicus), which has white shoulders, head, rump, and
tail; the European white-tailed eagle (H. albicilla); and the Indian
white-tailed sea eagle, or fishing eagle (Polioaëtus ichthyaëtus). The
bald eagle and the osprey are also sometimes classed as sea eagles.

2. (Zoöl.) The eagle ray. See under Ray.

Sea"-ear` (s"r`), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of ear-shaped shells of the
genus Haliotis. See Abalone.

Sea" eel` (s" l`). (Zoöl.) The conger eel.

Sea" egg` (s" g`). (Zoöl.) A sea urchin.

Sea" el"e*phant (s" "*fant). (Zoöl.) A very large seal (Macrorhinus
proboscideus) of the Antarctic seas, much hunted for its oil. It
sometimes attains a length of thirty feet, and is remarkable for the
prolongation of the nose of the adult male into an erectile elastic
proboscis, about a foot in length. Another species of smaller size (M.
angustirostris) occurs on the coast of Lower California, but is now
nearly extinct.

Sea" fan` (s" fn`). (Zoöl.) Any gorgonian which branches in a fanlike
form, especially Gorgonia flabellum of Florida and the West Indies.

Sea"far`er (?), n. [Sea + fare.] One who follows the sea as a business;
a mariner; a sailor.

Sea"far`ing, a. Following the business of a mariner; as, a seafaring
man.

Sea" feath"er (?). (Zoöl.) Any gorgonian which branches in a plumelike
form.

Sea" fen"nel (?). (Bot.) Samphire.

Sea" fern" (?). (Zoöl.) Any gorgonian which branches like a fern.

Sea" fight` (?). An engagement between ships at sea; a naval battle.

Sea" fir` (?). (Zoöl.) A sertularian hydroid, especially Sertularia
abietina, which branches like a miniature fir tree.

Sea" flow"er (?). (Zoöl.) A sea anemone, or any related anthozoan.

Sea" foam` (?). 1. Foam of sea water.

2. (Min.) Meerschaum; -- called also sea froth.

Sea" fowl` (?). (Zoöl.) Any bird which habitually frequents the sea, as
an auk, gannet, gull, tern, or petrel; also, all such birds,
collectively.

Sea" fox` (?). (Zoöl.) The thrasher shark. See Thrasher.

Sea" froth` (?; 115). See Sea foam, 2.

{ Sea"-gate`, Sea"-gait` }, n. A long, rolling swell of the sea. Ham.
Nav. Encyc.

Sea" gauge` (?). See under Gauge, n.

{ Sea" gher`kin (?), or Sea" gir"kin (?) }. (Zoöl.) Any small
holothurian resembling in form a gherkin.

Sea" gin"ger (?). (Zoöl.) A hydroid coral of the genus Millepora,
especially M. alcicornis, of the West Indies and Florida. So called
because it stings the tongue like ginger. See Illust. under Millepore.

Sea" gir"dles (?). (Bot.) A kind of kelp (Laminaria digitata) with
palmately cleft fronds; -- called also sea wand, seaware, and tangle.

Sea"girt` (?), a. Surrounded by the water of the sea or ocean; as, a
seagirt isle. Milton.

Sea" god` (?). A marine deity; a fabulous being supposed to live in, or
have dominion over, the sea, or some particular sea or part of the sea,
as Neptune.

Sea" god"dess (?). A goddess supposed to live in or reign over the sea,
or some part of the sea.

Sea"go`ing (?), a. Going upon the sea; especially, sailing upon the
deep sea; -- used in distinction from coasting or river, as applied to
vessels.

Sea" goose` (?). (Zoöl.) A phalarope.

Sea" gown` (?). A gown or frock with short sleeves, formerly worn by
mariners. Shak.

Sea" grape` (?). 1. (Bot.) (a) The gulf weed. See under Gulf. (b) A
shrubby plant (Coccoloba uvifera) growing on the sandy shores of
tropical America, somewhat resembling the grapevine.

2. pl. (Zoöl.) The clusters of gelatinous egg capsules of a squid
(Loligo).

Sea" grass` (?). (Bot.) Eelgrass.

Sea" green` (?). The green color of sea water.

Sea"-green`, a. Of a beautiful bluish green color, like sea water on
soundings.

Sea" gud"geon (?). (Zoöl.) The European black goby (Gobius niger).

Sea" gull` (?). (Zoöl.) Any gull living on the seacoast.

||Se"ah (?), n. A Jewish dry measure containing one third of an ephah.

Sea" hare` (?). (Zoöl.) Any tectibranchiate mollusk of the genus
Aplysia. See Aplysia.

Sea" hawk` (?). (Zoöl.) A jager gull.

Sea" heath` (?). (Bot.) A low perennial plant (Frankenia lævis)
resembling heath, growing along the seashore in Europe.

Sea" hedge"hog` (?). (Zoöl.) A sea urchin.

Sea" hen` (?). (Zoöl.) The common guillemot; -- applied also to various
other sea birds.

Sea" hog` (?). (Zoöl.) The porpoise.

Sea" hol"ly (?). (Bot.) An evergeen seashore plant (Eryngium
maritimum). See Eryngium.

Sea" holm` (?). A small uninhabited island.

Sea" holm`. (Bot.) Sea holly.

Sea" horse` (?). 1. A fabulous creature, half horse and half fish,
represented in classic mythology as driven by sea dogs or ridden by the
Nereids. It is also depicted in heraldry. See Hippocampus.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The walrus. (b) Any fish of the genus Hippocampus.

In a passage of Dryden's, the word is supposed to refer to the
hippopotamus.

Sea" hul"ver (?). (Bot.) Sea holly.

Sea"-is`land (?), a. Of or pertaining to certain islands along the
coast of South Carolina and Georgia; as, sea-island cotton, a superior
cotton of long fiber produced on those islands.

Sea" jel"ly (?). (Zoöl.) A medusa, or jellyfish.

Seak (?), n. Soap prepared for use in milling cloth.

Sea" kale" (?). (Bot.) See under Kale.

Sea" king` (?). One of the leaders among the Norsemen who passed their
lives in roving the seas in search of plunder and adventures; a Norse
pirate chief. See the Note under Viking.

Seal (sl), n. [OE. sele, AS. seolh; akin to OHG. selah, Dan. sæl, Sw.
själ, Icel. selr.] (Zoöl.) Any aquatic carnivorous mammal of the
families Phocidæ and Otariidæ.

Seals inhabit seacoasts, and are found principally in the higher
latitudes of both hemispheres. There are numerous species, bearing such
popular names as sea lion, sea leopard, sea bear, or ursine seal, fur
seal, and sea elephant. The bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus), the
hooded seal (Cystophora cristata), and the ringed seal (Phoca fœtida),
are northern species. See also Eared seal, Harp seal, Monk seal, and
Fur seal, under Eared, Harp, Monk, and Fur. Seals are much hunted for
their skins and fur, and also for their oil, which in some species is
very abundant.

Harbor seal (Zoöl.), the common seal (Phoca vitulina). It inhabits both
the North Atlantic and the North Pacific Ocean, and often ascends
rivers; -- called also marbled seal, native seal, river seal, bay seal,
land seal, sea calf, sea cat, sea dog, dotard, ranger, selchie,
tangfish.

Seal, n. [OE. seel, OF. seel, F. sceau, fr. L. sigillum a little figure
or image, a seal, dim. of signum a mark, sign, figure, or image. See
Sign, n., and cf. Sigil.] 1. An engraved or inscribed stamp, used for
marking an impression in wax or other soft substance, to be attached to
a document, or otherwise used by way of authentication or security.

2. Wax, wafer, or other tenacious substance, set to an instrument, and
impressed or stamped with a seal; as, to give a deed under hand and
seal.

    Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond Thou but offend'st
    thy lungs to speak so loud.


Shak.

3. That which seals or fastens; esp., the wax or wafer placed on a
letter or other closed paper, etc., to fasten it.

4. That which confirms, ratifies, or makes stable; that which
authenticates; that which secures; assurance. "Under the seal of
silence." Milton.

    Like a red seal is the setting sun On the good and the evil men
    have done.


Longfellow.

5. An arrangement for preventing the entrance or return of gas or air
into a pipe, by which the open end of the pipe dips beneath the surface
of water or other liquid, or a deep bend or sag in the pipe is filled
with the liquid; a draintrap.

Great seal. See under Great. -- Privy seal. See under Privy, a. -- Seal
lock, a lock in which the keyhole is covered by a seal in such a way
that the lock can not be opened without rupturing the seal. -- Seal
manual. See under Manual, a. -- Seal ring, a ring having a seal
engraved on it, or ornamented with a device resembling a seal; a signet
ring. Shak.

Seal, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sealed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sealing.] [OE.
selen; cf. OF. seeler, seieler, F. sceller, LL. sigillare. See Seal a
stamp.] 1. To set or affix a seal to; hence, to authenticate; to
confirm; to ratify; to establish; as, to seal a deed.

    And with my hand I seal my true heart's love.


Shak.

2. To mark with a stamp, as an evidence of standard exactness, legal
size, or merchantable quality; as, to seal weights and measures; to
seal silverware.

3. To fasten with a seal; to attach together with a wafer, wax, or
other substance causing adhesion; as, to seal a letter.

4. Hence, to shut close; to keep close; to make fast; to keep secure or
secret.

    Seal up your lips, and give no words but "mum".


Shak.

5. To fix, as a piece of iron in a wall, with cement, plaster, or the
like. Gwilt.

6. To close by means of a seal; as, to seal a drainpipe with water. See
2d Seal, 5.

7. Among the Mormons, to confirm or set apart as a second or additional
wife. [Utah, U.S.]

    If a man once married desires a second helpmate . . . she is sealed
    to him under the solemn sanction of the church.


H. Stansbury.

Seal, v. i. To affix one's seal, or a seal. [Obs.]

    I will seal unto this bond.


Shak.

Sea" la"ces (?). (Bot.) A kind of seaweed (Chorda Filum) having
blackish cordlike fronds, often many feet long.

Sea" lam"prey (?). (Zoöl.) The common lamprey.

Sea" lan"guage (?). The peculiar language or phraseology of seamen;
sailor's cant.

Sea" lark` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The rock pipit (Anthus obscurus). (b) Any
one of several small sandpipers and plovers, as the ringed plover, the
turnstone, the dunlin, and the sanderling.

Sea" lav"en*der (?). (Bot.) See Marsh rosemary, under Marsh.

Sea" law"yer (?). (Zoöl.) The gray snapper. See under Snapper.

Seal"-brown` (?), a. Of a rich dark brown color, like the fur of the
fur seal after it is dyed.

Sea" legs` (?). Legs able to maintain their possessor upright in stormy
weather at sea, that is, ability to stand or walk steadily on deck when
a vessel is rolling or pitching in a rough sea. [Sailor's Cant] Totten.

Sea" lem"on (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of nudibranchiate
mollusks of the genus Doris and allied genera, having a smooth, thick,
convex yellow body.

Sea" leop"ard (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of spotted seals,
especially Ogmorhinus leptonyx, and Leptonychotes Weddelli, of the
Antarctic Ocean. The North Pacific sea leopard is the harbor seal.

Seal"er (?), n. One who seals; especially, an officer whose duty it is
to seal writs or instruments, to stamp weights and measures, or the
like.

Sealer, n. A mariner or a vessel engaged in the business of capturing
seals.

Sea" let"ter (?). (Mar. Law.) The customary certificate of national
character which neutral merchant vessels are bound to carry in time of
war; a passport for a vessel and cargo. Burrill.

Sea" let"tuce (?). (Bot.) The green papery fronds of several seaweeds
of the genus Ulva, sometimes used as food.

Sea" lev"el (?). The level of the surface of the sea; any surface on
the same level with the sea.

{ Sealgh (?), Selch, n. }. (Zoöl.) A seal. [Scotch]

Sea" lil"y (?). (Zoöl.) A crinoid.

Seal"ing wax` (?). A compound of the resinous materials, pigments,
etc., used as a material for seals, as for letters, documents, etc.

Sea" li"on (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of several large species of seals of
the family Otariidæ native of the Pacific Ocean, especially the
southern sea lion (Otaria jubata) of the South American coast; the
northern sea lion (Eumetopias Stelleri) found from California to Japan;
and the black, or California, sea lion (Zalophus Californianus), which
is common on the rocks near San Francisco.

Sea" loach" (?). (Zoöl.) The three- bearded rockling. See Rockling.

Sea" louse` (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of isopod
crustaceans of Cymothoa, Livoneca, and allied genera, mostly parasites
on fishes.

Seam (sm), n. [See Saim.] Grease; tallow; lard. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]
Shak. Dryden.

Seam, n. [OE. seem, seam, AS. seám; akin to D. zoom, OHG. soum, G.
saum, LG. soom, Icel. saumr, Sw. & Dan. söm, and E. sew. &radic; 156.
See Sew to fasten with thread.] 1. The fold or line formed by sewing
together two pieces of cloth or leather.

2. Hence, a line of junction; a joint; a suture, as on a ship, a floor,
or other structure; the line of union, or joint, of two boards, planks,
metal plates, etc.

    Precepts should be so finely wrought together . . . that no coarse
    seam may discover where they join.


Addison.

3. (Geol. & Mining) A thin layer or stratum; a narrow vein between two
thicker strata; as, a seam of coal.

4. A line or depression left by a cut or wound; a scar; a cicatrix.

Seam blast, a blast made by putting the powder into seams or cracks of
rocks. -- Seam lace, a lace used by carriage makers to cover seams and
edges; -- called also seaming lace. -- Seam presser. (Agric.) (a) A
heavy roller to press down newly plowed furrows. (b) A tailor's sadiron
for pressing seams. Knight. -- Seam set, a set for flattering the seams
of metal sheets, leather work, etc.

Seam, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seamed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seaming.] 1. To
form a seam upon or of; to join by sewing together; to unite.

2. To mark with something resembling a seam; to line; to scar.

    Seamed o'er with wounds which his own saber gave.


Pope.

3. To make the appearance of a seam in, as in knitting a stocking;
hence, to knit with a certain stitch, like that in such knitting.

Seam, v. i. To become ridgy; to crack open.

    Later their lips began to parch and seam.


L. Wallace.

Seam, n. [AS. seám, LL. sauma, L. sagma a packsaddle, fr. Gr. &?;. See
Sumpter.] A denomination of weight or measure. Specifically: (a) The
quantity of eight bushels of grain. "A seam of oats." P. Plowman. (b)
The quantity of 120 pounds of glass. [Eng.]

Sea"-maid` (?), n. 1. The mermaid.

2. A sea nymph.

Sea"-mail` (?), n. [Sea + (perhaps) Mall Mally, for Mary; hence, Prov.
E. mally a hare.] (Zoöl.) A gull; the mew.

Sea"man (?), n.; pl. Seamen (&?;). A merman; the male of the mermaid.
[R.] "Not to mention mermaids or seamen." Locke.

Sea"man (?), n.; pl. Seamen (#). [AS. sæman.] One whose occupation is
to assist in the management of ships at sea; a mariner; a sailor; --
applied both to officers and common mariners, but especially to the
latter. Opposed to landman, or landsman.

Able seaman, a sailor who is practically conversant with all the duties
of common seamanship. -- Ordinary seaman. See Ordinary.

Sea"man*like` (?), a. Having or showing the skill of a practical
seaman.

Sea"man*ship, n. The skill of a good seaman; the art, or skill in the
art, of working a ship.

Sea" man"tis (?). (Zoöl.) A squilla.

Sea" marge` (?). Land which borders on the sea; the seashore. Shak.

    You are near the sea marge of a land teeming with life.


J. Burroughs.

Sea"mark` (?), n. Any elevated object on land which serves as a guide
to mariners; a beacon; a landmark visible from the sea, as a hill, a
tree, a steeple, or the like. Shak.

Sea" mat` (?). (Zoöl.) Any bryozoan of the genus Flustra or allied
genera which form frondlike corals.

Sea" maw` (?). (Zoöl.) The sea mew.

Seamed (?), a. (Falconry) Out of condition; not in good condition; --
said of a hawk.

Sea"-mell` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The sea mew.

Sea" mew` (?). (Zoöl.) A gull; the mew.

Sea" mile` (?). A geographical mile. See Mile.

Sea" milk"wort` (?). (Bot.) A low, fleshy perennial herb (Glaux
maritima) found along northern seashores.

Seam"ing (?), n. 1. The act or process of forming a seam or joint.

2. (Fishing) The cord or rope at the margin of a seine, to which the
meshes of the net are attached.

Seaming machine, a machine for uniting the edges of sheet-metal plates
by bending them and pinching them together.

Seam"less, a. Without a seam.

    Christ's seamless coat, all of a piece.


Jer. Taylor.

Sea" monk` (?). (Zoöl.) See Monk seal, under Monk.

Sea" mon"ster (?). (Zoöl.) Any large sea animal.

Sea" moss` (?; 115). (Zoöl.) Any branched marine bryozoan resembling
moss.

Sea" mouse` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A dorsibranchiate annelid, belonging to
Aphrodite and allied genera, having long, slender, hairlike setæ on the
sides. (b) The dunlin.

Seam"ster (?), n. [See Seamstress.] One who sews well, or whose
occupation is to sew. [Obs.]

Seam"stress (?; 277), n. [From older seamster, properly fem., AS.
seámestre. See Seam.] A woman whose occupation is sewing; a
needlewoman.

Seam"stress*y (?), n. The business of a seamstress.

Sea" mud` (?). A rich slimy deposit in salt marshes and along the
seashore, sometimes used as a manure; -- called also sea ooze.

Seam"y (?), a. Having a seam; containing seams, or showing them. "Many
a seamy scar." Burns.

    Everything has its fair, as well as its seamy, side.


Sir W. Scott.

Sean (?), n. A seine. See Seine. [Prov. Eng.]

||Sé`ance" (?), n. [F., fr. L. sedens, -entis, p. pr. of sedere to sit.
||See Sit.] A session, as of some public body; especially, a meeting of
||spiritualists to receive spirit communications, so called.

Sea" nee"dle (?). (Zoöl.) See Garfish (a).

Sea" net`tle (?). A jellyfish, or medusa.

Sean"na*chie (?), n. [Gael. seanachaidh.] A bard among the Highlanders
of Scotland, who preserved and repeated the traditions of the tribes;
also, a genealogist. [Written also sennachy.] [Scot.]

Sea" on"ion (?). (Bot.) The officinal squill. See Squill.

Sea" ooze` (?). Same as Sea mud. Mortimer.

Sea" or"ange (?). (Zoöl.) A large American holothurian (Lophothuria
Fabricii) having a bright orange convex body covered with finely
granulated scales. Its expanded tentacles are bright red.

Sea"-orb` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A globefish.

Sea" ot"ter (?). (Zoöl.) An aquatic carnivore (Enhydris lutris, or
marina) found in the North Pacific Ocean. Its fur is highly valued,
especially by the Chinese. It is allied to the common otter, but is
larger, with feet more decidedly webbed.

Sea-otter's cabbage (Bot.), a gigantic kelp of the Pacific Ocean
(Nereocystis Lutkeana). See Nereocystis.

Sea" owl` (s" oul`). (Zoöl.) The lumpfish.

Sea" pad` (s" pd`). (Zoöl.) A starfish.

Sea" par"rot (s" pr"rt). (Zoöl.) The puffin.

Sea" par"tridge (?). (Zoöl.) The gilthead (Crenilabrus melops), a fish
of the British coasts.

Sea" pass` (?). A document carried by neutral merchant vessels in time
of war, to show their nationality; a sea letter or passport. See
Passport.

Sea" peach` (?). (Zoöl.) A beautiful American ascidian (Cynthia, or
Halocynthia, pyriformis) having the size, form, velvety surface, and
color of a ripe peach.

Sea" pear` (s" pâr`). (Zoöl.) A pedunculated ascidian of the genus
Boltonia.

Sea"-pen" (?), n. (Zoöl.) A pennatula.

Sea" perch` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The European bass (Roccus, or Labrax,
lupus); -- called also sea dace. (b) The cunner. (c) The sea bass. (d)
The name is applied also to other species of fishes.

Sea" pheas"ant (?). (Zoöl.) The pintail duck.

Sea" pie` (s" p`). (Zoöl.) The oyster catcher, a limicoline bird of the
genus Hæmatopus.

Sea" pie`. A dish of crust or pastry and meat or fish, etc., cooked
together in alternate layers, -- a common food of sailors; as, a
three-decker sea pie.

Sea"piece` (?), n. A picture representing a scene at sea; a marine
picture. Addison.

Sea" pi"et (?). (Zoöl.) See 1st Sea pie.

Sea" pig` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A porpoise or dolphin. (b) A dugong.

Sea" pi"geon (?). The common guillemot.

Sea" pike` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The garfish. (b) A large serranoid food
fish (Centropomus undecimalis) found on both coasts of America; --
called also robalo. (c) The merluce.

Sea" pin`cush`ion (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A sea purse. (b) A pentagonal
starfish.

Sea" pink` (?). (Bot.) See Thrift.

Sea" plov"er (?). The black-bellied plover.

{ Sea" poach"er (s" pch"r). Sea" pok"er (s" pk"r). } (Zoöl.) The lyrie.

Sea" pool` (?). A pool of salt water. Spenser.

Sea" pop"py (?). (Bot.) The horn poppy. See under Horn.

Sea" por"cu*pine (?). (Zoöl.) Any fish of the genus Diodon, and allied
genera, whose body is covered with spines. See Illust. under Diodon.

Sea" pork` (?). (Zoöl.) An American compound ascidian (Amorœcium
stellatum) which forms large whitish masses resembling salt pork.

Sea" port` (s"prt`), n. A port on the seashore, or one accessible for
seagoing vessels. Also used adjectively; as, a seaport town.

Sea"poy (?), n. See Sepoy.

Sea" pud"ding (?). (Zoöl.) Any large holothurian. [Prov. Eng.]

Sea" purse` (s" pûrs`). (Zoöl.) The horny egg case of a skate, and of
certain sharks.

Sea" purs"lane (?). (Bot.) See under Purslane.

Sea" pye` (?). (Zoöl.) See 1st Sea pie.

Sea" py"ot (?). (Zoöl.) See 1st Sea pie.

Sea" quail` (?). (Zoöl.) The turnstone.

Sea"quake` (s"kwk`), n. A quaking of the sea.

{ Sear, Sere (sr) }, a. [OE. seer, AS. seár (assumed) fr. seárian to
wither; akin to D. zoor dry, LG. soor, OHG. sorn to wither, Gr. a"y`ein
to parch, to dry, Skr. çush (for sush) to dry, to wither, Zend hush to
dry. &radic;152. Cf. Austere, Sorrel, a.] Dry; withered; no longer
green; -- applied to leaves. Milton.

    I have lived long enough; my way of life Is fall'n into the sear,
    the yellow leaf.


Shak.

Sear, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seared (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Searing.] [OE.
seeren, AS. seárian. See Sear, a.] 1. To wither; to dry up. Shak.

2. To burn (the surface of) to dryness and hardness; to cauterize; to
expose to a degree of heat such as changes the color or the hardness
and texture of the surface; to scorch; to make callous; as, to sear the
skin or flesh. Also used figuratively.

    I'm seared with burning steel.


Rowe.

    It was in vain that the amiable divine tried to give salutary pain
    to that seared conscience.


Macaulay.

    The discipline of war, being a discipline in destruction of life,
    is a discipline in callousness. Whatever sympathies exist are
    seared.


H. Spencer.

Sear is allied to scorch in signification; but it is applied primarily
to animal flesh, and has special reference to the effect of heat in
marking the surface hard. Scorch is applied to flesh, cloth, or any
other substance, and has no reference to the effect of hardness.

To sear up, to close by searing. "Cherish veins of good humor, and sear
up those of ill." Sir W. Temple.

Sear, n. [F. serre a grasp, pressing, fr. L. sera. See Serry.] The
catch in a gunlock by which the hammer is held cocked or half cocked.

Sear spring, the spring which causes the sear to catch in the notches
by which the hammer is held.

Sea" rat` (?). 1. A pirate. [R.] Massinger.

2. (Zoöl.) The chimæra.

Sea" ra"ven (?). (Zoöl.) (a) An American cottoid fish (Hemitripterus
Americanus) allied to the sculpins, found on the northern Atlantic
coasts. (b) The cormorant.

Searce (?), n. [See Sarse.] A fine sieve. [Obs.]

Searce, v. t. To sift; to bolt. [Obs.] Mortimer.

Sear"cer (?), n. 1. One who sifts or bolts. [Obs.]

2. A searce, or sieve. [Obs.] Holland.

Search (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Searched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Searching.] [OE. serchen, cerchen, OF. cerchier, F. chercher, L.
circare to go about, fr. L. circum, circa, around. See Circle.] 1. To
look over or through, for the purpose of finding something; to examine;
to explore; as, to search the city. "Search the Scriptures." John v.
39.

    They are come to search the house.


Shak.

    Search me, O God, and know my heart.


Ps. cxxxix. 23.

2. To inquire after; to look for; to seek.

    I will both search my sheep, and seek them out.


Ezek. xxxiv. 11.

    Enough is left besides to search and know.


Milton.

3. To examine or explore by feeling with an instrument; to probe; as,
to search a wound.

4. To examine; to try; to put to the test.

To search out, to seek till found; to find by seeking; as, to search
out truth.

Syn. -- To explore; examine; scrutinize; seek; investigate; pry into;
inquire.

Search, v. i. To seek; to look for something; to make inquiry,
exploration, or examination; to hunt.

    Once more search with me.


Shak.

    It sufficeth that they have once with care sifted the matter, and
    searched into all the particulars.


Locke.

Search, n. [Cf. OF. cerche. See Search, v. t.] The act of seeking or
looking for something; quest; inquiry; pursuit for finding something;
examination.

    Thus the orb he roamed With narrow search, and with inspection deep
    Considered every creature.


Milton.

    Nor did my search of liberty begin Till my black hairs were changed
    upon my chin.


Dryden.

Right of search (Mar. Law), the right of the lawfully commissioned
cruisers of belligerent nations to examine and search private merchant
vessels on the high seas, for the enemy's property or for articles
contraband of war. -- Search warrant (Law), a warrant legally issued,
authorizing an examination or search of a house, or other place, for
goods stolen, secreted, or concealed.

Syn. -- Scrutiny; examination; exploration; investigation; research;
inquiry; quest; pursuit.

Search"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being searched.

Search"a*ble*ness, n. Quality of being searchable.

Search"er (?), n. [Cf. OF. cercheor inspector.] One who, or that which,
searches or examines; a seeker; an inquirer; an examiner; a trier.
Specifically: (a) Formerly, an officer in London appointed to examine
the bodies of the dead, and report the cause of death. Graunt. (b) An
officer of the customs whose business it is to search ships,
merchandise, luggage, etc. (c) An inspector of leather. [Prov. Eng.]
(d) (Gun.) An instrument for examining the bore of a cannon, to detect
cavities. (e) An implement for sampling butter; a butter trier. (j)
(Med.) An instrument for feeling after calculi in the bladder, etc.

Search"ing, a. Exploring thoroughly; scrutinizing; penetrating; trying;
as, a searching discourse; a searching eye. "Piercing, searching,
biting, cold." Dickens.

-- Search"ing*ly, adv. -- Search"ing*ness, n.

Search"less, a. Impossible to be searched; inscrutable; impenetrable.

Sear"cloth` (?; 115), n. Cerecloth. Mortimer.

Sear"cloth, v. t. To cover, as a sore, with cerecloth.

Seared (?), a. Scorched; cauterized; hence, figuratively, insensible;
not susceptible to moral influences.

    A seared conscience and a remorseless heart.


Macaulay.

Sear"ed*ness (?), n. The state of being seared or callous;
insensibility. Bp. Hall.

Sea" reed` (?). (Bot.) The sea-sand reed. See under Reed.

Sea" risk (?). Risk of injury, destruction, or loss by the sea, or
while at sea.

Sea" rob"ber (?). A pirate; a sea rover.

Sea" rob"in (?). See under Robin, and Illustration in Appendix.

Sea" rock"et (?).(Bot.) See under Rocket.

Sea" room` (?). (Naut.) Room or space at sea for a vessel to maneuver,
drive, or scud, without peril of running ashore or aground. Totten.

Sea" rov"er (?). One that cruises or roves the sea for plunder; a sea
robber; a pirate; also, a piratical vessel.

Sea"-rov"ing, a. Cruising at random on the ocean.

Sea" salm"on (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A young pollock. (b) The spotted
squeteague. (c) See Sea bass (b).

Sea" salt` (?). Common salt, obtained from sea water by evaporation.

Sea" sand"pi`per (?). (Zoöl.) The purple sandpiper.

Sea" sand"wort` (?). (Bot.) See Sea chickweed.

Sea" sau"ri*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any marine saurian; esp. (Paleon.), the
large extinct species of Mosasaurus, Ichthyosaurus, Plesiosaurus, and
related genera.

Sea"scape (?), n. [Cf. Landscape.] A picture representing a scene at
sea. [Jocose] Thackeray.

Sea" scor"pi*on (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A European sculpin (Cottus scorpius)
having the head armed with short spines. (b) The scorpene.

Sea" scurf` (?). (Zoöl.) Any bryozoan which forms rounded or irregular
patches of coral on stones, seaweeds, etc.

Sea" ser"pent (?). 1. (Zoöl.) Any marine snake. See Sea snake.

2. (Zoöl.) A large marine animal of unknown nature, often reported to
have been seen at sea, but never yet captured.

Many accounts of sea serpents are imaginary or fictitious; others are
greatly exaggerated and distorted by incompetent observers; but a
number have been given by competent and trustworthy persons, which
indicate that several diverse animals have been called sea serpents.
Among these are, apparently, several large snakelike fishes, as the oar
fish, or ribbon fish (Regalecus), and huge conger eels. Other accounts
probably refer to the giant squids (Architeuthis). Some of the best
accounts seem to describe a marine saurian, like the fossil Mosasauri,
which were large serpentlike creatures with paddles.

Sea"shell` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The shell of any marine mollusk.

Sea"shore` (?), n. 1. The coast of the sea; the land that lies adjacent
to the sea or ocean.

2. (Law) All the ground between the ordinary high-water and low-water
marks.

Sea"sick` (?), a. Affected with seasickness.

Sea"sick`ness, n. The peculiar sickness, characterized by nausea and
prostration, which is caused by the pitching or rolling of a vessel.

Sea"side` (?), n. The land bordering on, or adjacent to, the sea; the
seashore. Also used adjectively.

Sea" slat"er (?). (Zoöl.) Any isopod crustacean of the genus Ligia.

Sea" slug` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A holothurian. (b) A nudibranch mollusk.

Sea" snail` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A small fish of the genus Liparis, having
a ventral sucker. It lives among stones and seaweeds. (b) Any small
creeping marine gastropod, as the species of Littorina, Natica, etc.

Sea" snake` (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of many species of venomous aquatic
snakes of the family Hydrophidæ, having a flattened tail and living
entirely in the sea, especially in the warmer parts of the Indian and
Pacific Oceans. They feed upon fishes, and are mostly of moderate size,
but some species become eight or ten feet long and four inches broad.

Sea" snipe` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A sandpiper, as the knot and dunlin. (b)
The bellows fish.

Sea"son (?), n. [OE. sesoun, F. saison, properly, the sowing time, fr.
L. satio a sowing, a planting, fr. serere, satum, to sow, plant; akin
to E. sow, v., to scatter, as seed.] 1. One of the divisions of the
year, marked by alterations in the length of day and night, or by
distinct conditions of temperature, moisture, etc., caused mainly by
the relative position of the earth with respect to the sun. In the
north temperate zone, four seasons, namely, spring, summer, autumn, and
winter, are generally recognized. Some parts of the world have three
seasons, -- the dry, the rainy, and the cold; other parts have but two,
-- the dry and the rainy.

    The several seasons of the year in their beauty.


Addison.

2. Hence, a period of time, especially as regards its fitness for
anything contemplated or done; a suitable or convenient time; proper
conjuncture; as, the season for planting; the season for rest.

    The season, prime for sweetest scents and airs.


Milton.

3. A period of time not very long; a while; a time.

    Thou shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season.


Acts xiii. 11.

4. That which gives relish; seasoning. [Obs.]

    You lack the season of all natures, sleep.


Shak.

In season, in good time, or sufficiently early for the purpose. -- Out
of season, beyond or out of the proper time or the usual or appointed
time.

Sea"son, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seasoned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seasoning.]
1. To render suitable or appropriate; to prepare; to fit.

    He is fit and seasoned for his passage.


Shak.

2. To fit for any use by time or habit; to habituate; to accustom; to
inure; to ripen; to mature; as, to season one to a climate.

3. Hence, to prepare by drying or hardening, or removal of natural
juices; as, to season timber.

4. To fit for taste; to render palatable; to give zest or relish to; to
spice; as, to season food.

5. Hence, to fit for enjoyment; to render agreeable.

    You season still with sports your serious hours.


Dryden.

    The proper use of wit is to season conversation.


Tillotson.

6. To qualify by admixture; to moderate; to temper. "When mercy seasons
justice." Shak.

7. To imbue; to tinge or taint. "Who by his tutor being seasoned with
the love of the truth." Fuller.

    Season their younger years with prudent and pious principles.


Jer. Taylor.

8. To copulate with; to impregnate. [R.] Holland.

Sea"son (?), v. i. 1. To become mature; to grow fit for use; to become
adapted to a climate.

2. To become dry and hard, by the escape of the natural juices, or by
being penetrated with other substance; as, timber seasons in the sun.

3. To give token; to savor. [Obs.] Beau. & Fl.

Sea"son*a*ble (?), a. Occurring in good time, in due season, or in
proper time for the purpose; suitable to the season; opportune; timely;
as, a seasonable supply of rain.

    Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction.


Ecclus. xxxv. 20.

-- Sea"son*a*ble*ness, n. -- Sea"son*a*bly, adv.

Sea"son*age (?), n. A seasoning. [Obs.] South.

Sea"son*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to the seasons.

Seasonal dimorphism (Zoöl.), the condition of having two distinct
varieties which appear at different seasons, as certain species of
butterflies in which the spring brood differs from the summer or
autumnal brood.

Sea"son*er (?), n. One who, or that which, seasons, or gives a relish;
a seasoning.

Sea"son*ing, n. 1. The act or process by which anything is seasoned.

2. That which is added to any species of food, to give it a higher
relish, as salt, spices, etc.; a condiment.

3. Hence, something added to enhance enjoyment or relieve dullness; as,
wit is the seasoning of conversation.

    Political speculations are of so dry and austere a nature, that
    they will not go down with the public without frequent seasonings.


Addison.

Seasoning tub (Bakery), a trough in which dough is set to rise. Knight.

Sea"son*less, a. Without succession of the seasons.

Sea" spi"der (?). (Zoöl.) (a) Any maioid crab; a spider crab. See
Maioid, and Spider crab, under Spider. (b) Any pycnogonid.

Sea" squirt` (?). (Zoöl.) An ascidian. See Illust. under Tunicata.

Sea" star` (?). (Zoöl.) A starfish, or brittle star.

Sea" sur"geon (?). (Zoöl.) A surgeon fish.

Sea" swal"low (?). 1. (Zoöl.) (a) The common tern. (b) The storm
petrel. (c) The gannet.

2. (Her.) See Cornish chough, under Chough.

Seat (st), n. [OE. sete, Icel. sæti; akin to Sw. säte, Dan. sæde, MHG.
sze, AS. set, setl, and E. sit. &radic;154. See Sit, and cf. Settle,
n.] 1. The place or thing upon which one sits; hence; anything made to
be sat in or upon, as a chair, bench, stool, saddle, or the like.

    And Jesus . . . overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the
    seats of them that sold doves.


Matt. xxi. 12.

2. The place occupied by anything, or where any person or thing is
situated, resides, or abides; a site; an abode, a station; a post; a
situation.

    Where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is.


Rev. ii. 13.

    He that builds a fair house upon an ill seat committeth himself to
    prison.


Bacon.

    A seat of plenty, content, and tranquillity.


Macaulay.

3. That part of a thing on which a person sits; as, the seat of a chair
or saddle; the seat of a pair of pantaloons.

4. A sitting; a right to sit; regular or appropriate place of sitting;
as, a seat in a church; a seat for the season in the opera house.

5. Posture, or way of sitting, on horseback.

    She had so good a seat and hand she might be trusted with any
    mount.


G. Eliot.

6. (Mach.) A part or surface on which another part or surface rests;
as, a valve seat.

Seat worm (Zoöl.), the pinworm.

Seat, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seated; p. pr. & vb. n. Seating.] 1. To place
on a seat; to cause to sit down; as, to seat one's self.

    The guests were no sooner seated but they entered into a warm
    debate.


Arbuthnot.

2. To cause to occupy a post, site, situation, or the like; to station;
to establish; to fix; to settle.

    Thus high . . . is King Richard seated.


Shak.

    They had seated themselves in New Guiana.


Sir W. Raleigh.

3. To assign a seat to, or the seats of; to give a sitting to; as, to
seat a church, or persons in a church.

4. To fix; to set firm.

    From their foundations, loosening to and fro, They plucked the
    seated hills.


Milton.

5. To settle; to plant with inhabitants; as to seat a country. [Obs.]
W. Stith.

6. To put a seat or bottom in; as, to seat a chair.

Seat, v. i. To rest; to lie down. [Obs.] Spenser.

Sea" tang` (?). (Bot.) A kind of seaweed; tang; tangle.

    To their nests of sedge and sea tang.


Longfellow.

Sea" term` (?). A term used specifically by seamen; a nautical word or
phrase.

Sea" thief` (?). A pirate. Drayton.

Sea" thongs` (?; 115). (Bot.) A kind of blackish seaweed (Himanthalia
lorea) found on the northern coasts of the Atlantic. It has a thonglike
forking process rising from a top-shaped base.

Seat"ing (st"ng), n. 1. The act of providing with a seat or seats; as,
the seating of an audience.

2. The act of making seats; also, the material for making seats; as,
cane seating.

Sea" tit"ling (?). (Zoöl.) The rock pipit.

Seat"less (?), a. Having no seat.

Sea" toad` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) A sculpin. (b) A toadfish. (c) The angler.

Sea" trout` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of several species of true trouts
which descend rivers and enter the sea after spawning, as the European
bull trout and salmon trout, and the eastern American spotted trout.
(b) The common squeteague, and the spotted squeteague. (c) A California
fish of the family Chiridæ, especially Hexagrammus decagrammus; --
called also spotted rock trout. See Rock trout, under Rock. (d) A
California sciænoid fish (Cynoscion nobilis); -- called also white sea
bass.

Sea" trum"pet (?). 1. (Bot.) A great blackish seaweed of the Southern
Ocean, having a hollow and expanding stem and a pinnate frond,
sometimes twenty feet long.

2. (Zoöl.) Any large marine univalve shell of the genus Triton. See
Triton.

Sea" turn` (?). A breeze, gale, or mist from the sea. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

Sea" tur"tle (?). (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of several very large species of
chelonians having the feet converted into paddles, as the green turtle,
hawkbill, loggerhead, and leatherback. They inhabit all warm seas. (b)
The sea pigeon, or guillemot.

Sea" u"ni*corn (?). (Zoöl.) The narwhal.

Sea" ur"chin (?). (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of echinoderms of
the order Echinoidea. When living they are covered with movable spines
which are often long and sharp.

Seave (?), n. [Cf. Dan. siv, Sw. säf, Icel. sef.] A rush. [Prov. Eng.]
Halliwell.

Seav`y, a. Overgrown with rushes. [Prov. Eng.]

Sea" wall` (?). [AS. sæweall.] A wall, or embankment, to resist
encroachments of the sea.

Sea"-walled` (?), a. Surrounded, bounded, or protected by the sea, as
if by a wall. Shak.

{ Sea"wan (?), Sea"want (?) }, n. The name used by the Algonquin
Indians for the shell beads which passed among the Indians as money.

Seawan was of two kinds; wampum, white, and suckanhock, black or
purple, -- the former having half the value of the latter. Many
writers, however, use the terms seawan and wampum indiscriminately.
Bartlett.

Sea"wand` . (Bot.) See Sea girdles.

Sea"ward (?), a. Directed or situated toward the sea. Donne.

    Two still clouds . . . sparkled on their seaward edges like a
    frosted fleece.


G. W. Cable.

Sea"ward, adv. Toward the sea. Drayton.

Sea"ware` (?), n. [Cf. AS. swr seaweed.] (Bot.) Seaweed; esp., coarse
seaweed. See Ware, and Sea girdles.

Sea"weed` (?), n. 1. Popularly, any plant or plants growing in the sea.

2. (Bot.) Any marine plant of the class Algæ, as kelp, dulse, Fucus,
Ulva, etc.

Sea" whip` (?). (Zoöl.) A gorgonian having a simple stem.

Sea" wid"geon (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The scaup duck. (b) The pintail duck.

Sea"wife` (?), n.; pl. Seawives (&?;). (Zoöl.) A European wrasse
(Labrus vetula).

Sea" wil"low (?). (Zoöl.) A gorgonian coral with long flexible
branches.

Sea" wing` (?). (Zoöl.) A wing shell (Avicula).

Sea" with"wind` (?). (Bot.) A kind of bindweed (Convolvulus Soldanella)
growing on the seacoast of Europe.

Sea" wolf` (?). (Zoöl.) (a) The wolf fish. (b) The European sea perch.
(c) The sea elephant. (d) A sea lion.

Sea" wood"cock` (?). (Zoöl.) The bar- tailed godwit.

Sea" wood" louse` (?). (Zoöl.) A sea slater.

Sea" worm"wood` (?). (Bot.) A European species of wormwood (Artemisia
maritima) growing by the sea.

Sea"wor`thi*ness (?), n. The state or quality of being seaworthy, or
able to resist the ordinary violence of wind and weather. Kent.

Sea"wor`thy (?), a. Fit for a voyage; worthy of being trusted to
transport a cargo with safety; as, a seaworthy ship.

Sea" wrack` (?). (Bot.) See Wrack.

Se*ba"ceous (?), a. [NL. sebaceus, from L. sebum tallow, grease.]
(Physiol.) Pertaining to, or secreting, fat; composed of fat; having
the appearance of fat; as, the sebaceous secretions of some plants, or
the sebaceous humor of animals.

Sebaceous cyst (Med.), a cyst formed by distention of a sebaceous
gland, due to obstruction of its excretory duct. -- Sebaceous glands
(Anat.), small subcutaneous glands, usually connected with hair
follicles. They secrete an oily semifluid matter, composed in great
part of fat, which softens and lubricates the hair and skin.

Se*bac"ic (?), a. [L. sebum tallow: cf. F. sébacique.] (Chem.) Of or
pertaining to fat; derived from, or resembling, fat; specifically,
designating an acid (formerly called also sebic, and pyroleic, acid),
obtained by the distillation or saponification of certain oils (as
castor oil) as a white crystalline substance.

Se"bat (?), n. [Heb. shbt.] The eleventh month of the ancient Hebrew
year, approximately corresponding with February. W. Smith (Bibl.
Dict.).

Se"bate (s"b\ddt), n. (Chem.) A salt of sebacic acid.

Se*bes"ten (?), n. [Ar. sebestn the tree: cf. Sp. sebesten.] (Bot.) The
mucilaginous drupaceous fruit of two East Indian trees (Cordia Myxa,
and C. latifolia), sometimes used medicinally in pectoral diseases.

In the West Indies the name is given to the similar fruit of Cordia
Sebestana.

Se"bic (?), a. See Sebacic. [Obs.]

Se*bif"er*ous (?), a. [L. sebum tallow + -ferous.] 1. (Bot.) Producing
vegetable tallow.

2. (Physiol.) Producing fat; sebaceous; as, the sebiferous, or
sebaceous, glands.

Se*bip"a*rous (?), a. [L. sebum tallow + parere to bring forth.]
(Physiol.) Same as Sebiferous.

||Seb"or*rhe*a (?), n. [NL., fr. L. sebum tallow + Gr. &?; to flow.]
||(Med.) A morbidly increased discharge of sebaceous matter upon the
||skin; stearrhea.

||Se*ca"le (?), n. [L., a kind of grain.] (Bot.) A genus of cereal
||grasses including rye.

Se"can*cy (?), n. [See Secant.] A cutting; an intersection; as, the
point of secancy of one line by another. [R.] Davies & Peck (Math.
Dict. ).

Se"cant (s"knt), a. [L. secans, -antis, p. pr. of secare to cut. See
Section.] Cutting; dividing into two parts; as, a secant line.

Secant, n. [Cf. F. sécante. See Secant, a.] 1. (Geom.) A line that cuts
another; especially, a straight line cutting a curve in two or more
points.

2. (Trig.) A right line drawn from the center of a circle through one
end of a circular arc, and terminated by a tangent drawn from the other
end; the number expressing the ratio of this line to the radius of the
circle. See Trigonometrical function, under Function.

||Sec"co (?), a. [It.] Dry.

Secco painting, or Painting in secco, painting on dry plaster, as
distinguished from fresco painting, which is on wet or fresh plaster.

Se"cede" (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Seceded; p. pr. & vb. n. Seceding.]
[L. secedere, secessum; pref se-  aside + cedere to go, move. See
Cede.] To withdraw from fellowship, communion, or association; to
separate one's self by a solemn act; to draw off; to retire;
especially, to withdraw from a political or religious body.

Se*ced"er (?), n. 1. One who secedes.

2. (Eccl. Hist.) One of a numerous body of Presbyterians in Scotland
who seceded from the communion of the Established Church, about the
year 1733, and formed the Secession Church, so called.

Se*cern" (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Secerned (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Secerning.] [L. secernere. See Secrete.] 1. To separate; to
distinguish.

    Averroes secerns a sense of titillation, and a sense of hunger and
    thirst.


Sir W. Hamilton.

2. (Physiol.) To secrete; as, mucus secerned in the nose. Arbuthnot.

Se*cern"ent (?), a. [L. secernens, p. pr.] (Physiol.) Secreting;
secretory.

Se*cern"ent, n. 1. That which promotes secretion.

2. (Anat.) A vessel in, or by means of, which the process of secretion
takes place; a secreting vessel.

Se*cern"ment (?), n. (Physiol.) The act or process of secreting.

Se*cess" (s*ss"), n. [L. secessus. See Secede.] Retirement; retreat;
secession. [Obs.] Dr. H. More.

Se*ces"sion (s*ssh"n), n. [L. secessio: cf. F. sécession. See Secede.]
1. The act of seceding; separation from fellowship or association with
others, as in a religious or political organization; withdrawal.

2. (U.S. Hist.) The withdrawal of a State from the national Union.

Secession Church (in Scotland). See Seceder.

Se*ces"sion*ism (?), n. The doctrine or policy of secession; the tenets
of secession; the tenets of secessionists.

Se*ces"sion*ist, n. 1. One who upholds secession.

2. (U.S. Hist.) One who holds to the belief that a State has the right
to separate from the Union at its will.

Seche (?), v. t. & i. To seek. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Se"chi*um (?), n. [NL.: cf. F. séchion; perhaps formed fr. Gr. &?;
cucumber.] (Bot.) The edible fruit of a West Indian plant (Sechium
edule) of the Gourd family. It is soft, pear-shaped, and about four
inches long, and contains a single large seed. The root of the plant
resembles a yam, and is used for food.

Seck (?), a. [F. sec, properly, dry, L. siccus.] Barren; unprofitable.
See Rent seck, under Rent.

Seck"el (?), n. (Bot.) A small reddish brown sweet and juicy pear. It
originated on a farm near Philadelphia, afterwards owned by a Mr.
Seckel.

Se"cle (?), n. [L. saeculum: cf. F. siècle. See Secular.] A century.
[Obs.] Hammond.

Se*clude (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Secluded; p. pr. & vb. n. Secluding.]
[L. secludere, seclusum; pref. se-  aside + claudere to shut. See
Close, v. t.] 1. To shut up apart from others; to withdraw into, or
place in, solitude; to separate from society or intercourse with
others.

    Let Eastern tyrants from the light of heaven Seclude their bosom
    slaves.


Thomson.

2. To shut or keep out; to exclude. [Obs.] Evelyn.

-- Se*clud"ed*ly, adv. -- Se*clud"ed*ness, n.

Se*clu"sion (?), n. [See Seclude.] The act of secluding, or the state
of being secluded; separation from society or connection; a
withdrawing; privacy; as, to live in seclusion.

    O blest seclusion from a jarring world, which he, thus occupied,
    enjoys!


Cowper.

Syn. -- Solitude; separation; withdrawment; retirement; privacy. See
Solitude.

Se*clu"sive (?), a. Tending to seclude; keeping in seclusion;
secluding; sequestering.

Sec"ond (?), a. [F., fr. L. secundus second, properly, following, fr.
sequi to follow. See Sue to follow, and cf. Secund.] 1. Immediately
following the first; next to the first in order of place or time;
hence, occurring again; another; other.

    And he slept and dreamed the second time.


Gen. xli. 5.

2. Next to the first in value, power, excellence, dignity, or rank;
secondary; subordinate; inferior.

    May the day when we become the second people upon earth . . . be
    the day of our utter extirpation.


Landor.

3. Being of the same kind as another that has preceded; another, like a
prototype; as, a second Cato; a second Troy; a second deluge.

    A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel!


Shak.

Second Adventist. See Adventist. -- Second cousin, the child of a
cousin. -- Second-cut file. See under File. -- Second distance (Art),
that part of a picture between the foreground and the background; --
called also middle ground, or middle distance. [R.] -- Second estate
(Eng.), the House of Peers. -- Second girl, a female house- servant who
does the lighter work, as chamber work or waiting on table. -- Second
intention. See under Intention. -- Second story, Second floor, in
America, the second range of rooms from the street level. This, in
England, is called the first floor, the one beneath being the ground
floor. -- Second thought or thoughts, consideration of a matter
following a first impulse or impression; reconsideration.

    On second thoughts, gentlemen, I don't wish you had known him.


Dickens.

Sec"ond (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, follows, or comes after; one
next and inferior in place, time, rank, importance, excellence, or
power.

    Man An angel's second, nor his second long.


Young.

2. One who follows or attends another for his support and aid; a
backer; an assistant; specifically, one who acts as another's aid in a
duel.

    Being sure enough of seconds after the first onset.


Sir H. Wotton.

3. Aid; assistance; help. [Obs.]

    Give second, and my love Is everlasting thine.


J. Fletcher.

4. pl. An article of merchandise of a grade inferior to the best; esp.,
a coarse or inferior kind of flour.

5. [F. seconde. See Second, a.] The sixtieth part of a minute of time
or of a minute of space, that is, the second regular subdivision of the
degree; as, sound moves about 1,140 English feet in a second; five
minutes and ten seconds north of this place.

6. In the duodecimal system of mensuration, the twelfth part of an inch
or prime; a line. See Inch, and Prime, n., 8.

7. (Mus.) (a) The interval between any tone and the tone which is
represented on the degree of the staff next above it. (b) The second
part in a concerted piece; -- often popularly applied to the alto.

Second hand, the hand which marks the seconds on the dial of a watch or
a clock.

Sec"ond, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seconded; p. pr. & vb. n. Seconding.] [Cf.
F. seconder, L. secundare, from secundus. See Second, a.] 1. To follow
in the next place; to succeed; to alternate. [R.]

    In the method of nature, a low valley is immediately seconded with
    an ambitious hill.


Fuller.

    Sin is seconded with sin.


South.

2. To follow or attend for the purpose of assisting; to support; to
back; to act as the second of; to assist; to forward; to encourage.

    We have supplies to second our attempt.


Shak.

    In human works though labored on with pain, A thousand movements
    scarce one purpose gain; In God's, one single can its end produce,
    Yet serves to second too some other use.


Pope.

3. Specifically, to support, as a motion or proposal, by adding one's
voice to that of the mover or proposer.

Sec"ond*a*ri*ly (?), adv. 1. In a secondary manner or degree.

2. Secondly; in the second place. [Obs.]

    God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily
    prophets, thirdly teachers.


1 Cor. xii. 28.

Sec"ond*a*ri*ness, n. The state of being secondary.

    Full of a girl's sweet sense of secondariness to the object of her
    love.


Mrs. Oliphant.

Sec"ond*a*ry (?), a. [Cf. F. secondaire, L. secundaire. See Second, a.]
1. Succeeding next in order to the first; of second place, origin,
rank, etc.; not primary; subordinate; not of the first order or rate.

    Wheresoever there is moral right on the one hand, no secondary
    right can discharge it.


L'Estrange.

    Two are the radical differences; the secondary differences are as
    four.


Bacon.

2. Acting by deputation or delegated authority; as, the work of
secondary hands.

3. (Chem.) Possessing some quality, or having been subject to some
operation (as substitution), in the second degree; as, a secondary
salt, a secondary amine, etc. Cf. primary.

4. (Min.) Subsequent in origin; -- said of minerals produced by
alteration or deposition subsequent to the formation of the original
rock mass; also of characters of minerals (as secondary cleavage, etc.)
developed by pressure or other causes.

5. (Zoöl.) Pertaining to the second joint of the wing of a bird.

6. (Med.) (a) Dependent or consequent upon another disease; as,
Bright's disease is often secondary to scarlet fever. (b) Occurring in
the second stage of a disease; as, the secondary symptoms of syphilis.

Secondary accent. See the Note under Accent, n., 1. -- Secondary age.
(Geol.) The Mesozoic age, or age before the Tertiary. See Mesozoic, and
Note under Age, n., 8. -- Secondary alcohol (Chem.), any one of a
series of alcohols which contain the radical CH.OH united with two
hydrocarbon radicals. On oxidation the secondary alcohols form ketones.
-- Secondary amputation (Surg.), an amputation for injury, performed
after the constitutional effects of the injury have subsided. --
Secondary axis (Opt.), any line which passes through the optical center
of a lens but not through the centers of curvature, or, in the case of
a mirror, which passes through the center of curvature but not through
the center of the mirror. -- Secondary battery. (Elec.) See under
Battery, n., 4. -- Secondary circle (Geom. & Astron.), a great circle
that passes through the poles of another great circle and is therefore
perpendicular to its plane. -- Secondary circuit, Secondary coil
(Elec.), a circuit or coil in which a current is produced by the
induction of a current in a neighboring circuit or coil called the
primary circuit or coil. -- Secondary color, a color formed by mixing
any two primary colors in equal proportions. -- Secondary coverts
(Zoöl.), the longer coverts which overlie the basal part of the
secondary quills of a bird. See Illust. under Bird. -- Secondary
crystal (Min.), a crystal derived from one of the primary forms. --
Secondary current (Elec.), a momentary current induced in a closed
circuit by a current of electricity passing through the same or a
contiguous circuit at the beginning and also at the end of the passage
of the primary current. -- Secondary evidence, that which is admitted
upon failure to obtain the primary or best evidence. -- Secondary fever
(Med.), a fever coming on in a disease after the subsidence of the
fever with which the disease began, as the fever which attends the
outbreak of the eruption in smallpox. -- Secondary hemorrhage (Med.),
hemorrhage occuring from a wounded blood vessel at some considerable
time after the original bleeding has ceased. -- Secondary planet.
(Astron.) See the Note under Planet. -- Secondary qualities, those
qualities of bodies which are not inseparable from them as such, but
are dependent for their development and intensity on the organism of
the percipient, such as color, taste, odor, etc. -- Secondary quills or
remiges (Zoöl.), the quill feathers arising from the forearm of a bird
and forming a row continuous with the primaries; -- called also
secondaries. See Illust. of Bird. -- Secondary rocks or strata (Geol.),
those lying between the Primary, or Paleozoic, and Tertiary (see
Primary rocks, under Primary); -- later restricted to strata of the
Mesozoic age, and at present but little used. -- Secondary syphilis
(Med.), the second stage of syphilis, including the period from the
first development of constitutional symptoms to the time when the bones
and the internal organs become involved. -- Secondary tint, any subdued
tint, as gray. -- Secondary union (Surg.), the union of wounds after
suppuration; union by the second intention.

Syn. -- Second; second-rate; subordinate; inferior.

Sec"ond*a*ry (?), n.; pl. Secondaries (&?;). 1. One who occupies a
subordinate, inferior, or auxiliary place; a delegate or deputy; one
who is second or next to the chief officer; as, the secondary, or
undersheriff of the city of London.

    Old Escalus . . . is thy secondary.


Shak.

2. (Astron.) (a) A secondary circle. (b) A satellite.

3. (Zoöl.) A secondary quill.

Sec"ond-class` (?), a. Of the rank or degree below the best or highest;
inferior; second-rate; as, a second-class house; a second-class
passage.

Sec"ond*er (?), n. One who seconds or supports what another attempts,
affirms, moves, or proposes; as, the seconder of an enterprise or of a
motion.

Sec"ond*hand` (?), a. 1. Not original or primary; received from
another.

    They have but a secondhand or implicit knowledge.


Locke.

2. Not new; already or previously possessed or used by another; as, a
secondhand book, garment.

At second hand. See Hand, n., 10.

Sec"ond*ly, adv. In the second place.

||Se*con"do (s*kn"d; It. s*kn"d), n. [It.] (Mus.) The second part in a
||concerted piece.

Sec"ond-rate` (?), a. Of the second size, rank, quality, or value; as,
a second-rate ship; second-rate cloth; a second-rate champion. Dryden.

Sec"ond-sight` (?), n. The power of discerning what is not visible to
the physical eye, or of foreseeing future events, esp. such as are of a
disastrous kind; the capacity of a seer; prophetic vision.

    He was seized with a fit of second- sight.


Addison.

    Nor less availed his optic sleight, And Scottish gift of
    second-sight.


Trumbull.

Sec"ond-sight`ed, a. Having the power of second-sight. [R.] Addison.

Se"cre (? or ?), a. Secret; secretive; faithful to a secret. [Obs.]

    To be holden stable and secre.


Chaucer.

Se"cre, n. A secret. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Se"cre*cy (?), n.; pl. Secrecies (#). [From Secret.] 1. The state or
quality of being hidden; as, his movements were detected in spite of
their secrecy.

    The Lady Anne, Whom the king hath in secrecy long married.


Shak.

2. That which is concealed; a secret. [R.] Shak.

3. Seclusion; privacy; retirement. "The pensive secrecy of desert
cell." Milton.

4. The quality of being secretive; fidelity to a secret; forbearance of
disclosure or discovery.

    It is not with public as with private prayer; in this, rather
    secrecy is commanded than outward show.


Hooker.

Se"cre*ly (?), adv. Secretly. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Se"cre*ness, n. Secrecy; privacy. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Se"cret (?), a. [F. secret (cf. Sp. & Pg. secreto, It. secreto,
segreto), fr. L. secretus, p. p. of secernere to put apart, to
separate. See Certain, and cf. Secrete, Secern.] 1. Hidden; concealed;
as, secret treasure; secret plans; a secret vow. Shak.

    The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things
    which are revealed belong unto us.


Deut. xxix. 29.

2. Withdrawn from general intercourse or notice; in retirement or
secrecy; secluded.

    There, secret in her sapphire cell, He with the Naïs wont to dwell.


Fenton.

3. Faithful to a secret; not inclined to divulge or betray confidence;
secretive. [R.]

    Secret Romans, that have spoke the word, And will not palter.


Shak.

4. Separate; distinct. [Obs.]

    They suppose two other divine hypostases superior thereunto, which
    were perfectly secret from matter.


Cudworth.

Syn. -- Hidden; concealed; secluded; retired; unseen; unknown; private;
obscure; recondite; latent; covert; clandestine; privy. See Hidden.

Se"cret, n. [F. secret (cf. Pr. secret, Sp. & Pg. secreto, It. secreto,
segreto), from L. secretum. See Secret, a.] 1. Something studiously
concealed; a thing kept from general knowledge; what is not revealed,
or not to be revealed.

    To tell our own secrets is often folly; to communicate those of
    others is treachery.


Rambler.

2. A thing not discovered; what is unknown or unexplained; a mystery.

    All secrets of the deep, all nature's works.


Milton.

3. pl. The parts which modesty and propriety require to be concealed;
the genital organs.

In secret, in a private place; in privacy or secrecy; in a state or
place not seen; privately.

    Bread eaten in secret is pleasant.


Prov. ix. 17.

Se"cret (?), v. t. To keep secret. [Obs.] Bacon.

Se"cret*age (?), n. [F.] A process in which mercury, or some of its
salts, is employed to impart the property of felting to certain kinds
of furs. Ure.

Sec`re*ta"ri*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a secretary; befitting a
secretary. [R.]

    Secretarial, diplomatic, or other official training.


Carlyle.

{ Sec`re*ta"ri*at (?), Sec`re*ta"ri*ate (?), } n. [F. secrétariat.] The
office of a secretary; the place where a secretary transacts business,
keeps records, etc.

Sec"re*ta*ry (?), n.; pl. Secretaries (#). [F. secrétaire (cf. Pr.
secretari, Sp. & Pg. secretario, It. secretario, segretario) LL.
secretarius, originally, a confidant, one intrusted with secrets, from
L. secretum a secret. See Secret, a. & n.] 1. One who keeps, or is
intrusted with, secrets. [R.]

2. A person employed to write orders, letters, dispatches, public or
private papers, records, and the like; an official scribe, amanuensis,
or writer; one who attends to correspondence, and transacts other
business, for an association, a public body, or an individual.

    That which is most of all profitable is acquaintance with the
    secretaries, and employed men of ambassadors.


Bacon.

3. An officer of state whose business is to superintend and manage the
affairs of a particular department of government, and who is usually a
member of the cabinet or advisory council of the chief executive; as,
the secretary of state, who conducts the correspondence and attends to
the relations of a government with foreign courts; the secretary of the
treasury, who manages the department of finance; the secretary of war,
etc.

4. A piece of furniture, with conveniences for writing and for the
arrangement of papers; an escritoire.

5. (Zoöl.) The secretary bird.

Secretary bird. [So called in allusion to the tufts of feathers at the
back of its head, which were fancifully thought to resemble pens stuck
behind the ear.] (Zoöl.) A large long-legged raptorial bird
(Gypogeranus serpentarius), native of South Africa, but now naturalized
in the West Indies and some other tropical countries. It has a powerful
hooked beak, a crest of long feathers, and a long tail. It feeds upon
reptiles of various kinds, and is much prized on account of its habit
of killing and devouring snakes of all kinds. Called also serpent
eater.

Syn. -- See the Note under Clerk, n., 4.

Sec"re*ta*ry*ship, n. The office, or the term of office, of a
secretary.

Se*crete" (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Secreted; p. pr. & vb. n.
Secreting.] [L. secretus separated, secret, hidden, p. p. of secernere.
See Secret, and cf. Discrete, Discreet.] 1. To deposit in a place of
hiding; to hide; to conceal; as, to secrete stolen goods; to secrete
one's self.

2. (Physiol.) To separate from the blood and elaborate by the process
of secretion; to elaborate and emit as a secretion. See Secretion.

    Why one set of cells should secrete bile, another urea, and so on,
    we do not know.


Carpenter.

Syn. -- To conceal; hide. See Conceal.

Se*cre"tion (?), n. [L. secretio: cf. F. sécrétion.] 1. The act of
secreting or concealing; as, the secretion of dutiable goods.

2. (Physiol.) The act of secreting; the process by which material is
separated from the blood through the agency of the cells of the various
glands and elaborated by the cells into new substances so as to form
the various secretions, as the saliva, bile, and other digestive
fluids. The process varies in the different glands, and hence are
formed the various secretions.

3. (Physiol.) Any substance or fluid secreted, or elaborated and
emitted, as the gastric juice.

Se"cret*ist (?), n. A dealer in secrets. [Obs.]

Se`cre*ti"tious (?), a. Parted by animal secretion; as, secretitious
humors. Floyer.

Se*cret"ive (?), a. Tending to secrete, or to keep secret or private;
as, a secretive disposition.

Se*cret"ive*ness, n. 1. The quality of being secretive; disposition or
tendency to conceal.

2. (Phren.) The faculty or propensity which impels to reserve, secrecy,
or concealment.

Se"cret*ly (?), adv. In a secret manner.

Se"cret*ness, n. 1. The state or quality of being secret, hid, or
concealed.

2. Secretiveness; concealment. Donne.

Se*cre`to-mo"to*ry (?), a. (Physiol.) Causing secretion; -- said of
nerves which go to glands and influence secretion.

Se*cre"to*ry (?), a. [Cf. F. sécrétoire. See Secrete.] (Physiol.)
Secreting; performing, or connected with, the office of secretion;
secernent; as, secretory vessels, nerves. -- n. A secretory vessel; a
secernent.

Sect (skt), n. [L. secare, sectum, to cut.] A cutting; a scion. [Obs.]
Shak.

Sect (skt), n. [F. secte, L. secta, fr. sequi to follow; often confused
with L. secare, sectum, to cut. See Sue to follow, and cf. Sept, Suit,
n.] Those following a particular leader or authority, or attached to a
certain opinion; a company or set having a common belief or allegiance
distinct from others; in religion, the believers in a particular creed,
or upholders of a particular practice; especially, in modern times, a
party dissenting from an established church; a denomination; in
philosophy, the disciples of a particular master; a school; in society
and the state, an order, rank, class, or party.

    He beareth the sign of poverty, And in that sect our Savior saved
    all mankind.


Piers Plowman.

    As of the sect of which that he was born, He kept his lay, to which
    that he was sworn.


Chaucer.

    The cursed sect of that detestable and false prophet Mohammed.


Fabyan.

    As concerning this sect [Christians], we know that everywhere it is
    spoken against.


Acts xxviii. 22.

Sec"tant (?), n. [L. secare, sectum, to cut.] One of the portions of
space bounded by the three coordinate planes. Specif. (Crystallog.),
one of the parts of a crystal into which it is divided by the axial
planes.

Sec*ta"ri*an (?), a. Pertaining to a sect, or to sects; peculiar to a
sect; bigotedly attached to the tenets and interests of a denomination;
as, sectarian principles or prejudices.

Sec*ta"ri*an, n. One of a sect; a member or adherent of a special
school, denomination, or religious or philosophical party; one of a
party in religion which has separated itself from established church,
or which holds tenets different from those of the prevailing
denomination in a state.

Syn. -- See Heretic.

Sec*ta"ri*an*ism (?), n. The quality or character of a sectarian;
devotion to the interests of a party; excess of partisan or
denominational zeal; adherence to a separate church organization.

Sec*ta"ri*an*ize (?), v. t. To imbue with sectarian feelings; to
subject to the control of a sect.

Sec"ta*rism, n. Sectarianism. [Obs.]

Sec"ta*rist (?), n. A sectary. [R.] T. Warton.

Sec"ta*ry (?), n.;pl. Sectaries (#). [F. sectaire. See Sect.] A
sectarian; a member or adherent of a sect; a follower or disciple of
some particular teacher in philosophy or religion; one who separates
from an established church; a dissenter.

    I never knew that time in England when men of truest religion were
    not counted sectaries.


Milton.

Sec*ta"tor (?), n. [L., fr. sectari, v. intens. fr. sequi to follow.
See Sue to follow.] A follower; a disciple; an adherent to a sect.
[Obs.] Sir W. Raleigh.

Sec"tile (?), a. [L. sectilis, fr. secare, sectum, to cut: cf. F.
sectile. See Section.] Capable of being cut; specifically (Min.),
capable of being severed by the knife with a smooth cut; -- said of
minerals.

Sec*til"i*ty (?), n. The state or quality of being sectile.

Sec"tion (?), n. [L. sectio, fr. secare, sectum, to cut; akin to E. saw
a cutting instrument: cf. F. section. See Saw, and cf. Scion, Dissect,
Insect, Secant, Segment.] 1. The act of cutting, or separation by
cutting; as, the section of bodies.

2. A part separated from something; a division; a portion; a slice.
Specifically: --

(a) A distinct part or portion of a book or writing; a subdivision of a
chapter; the division of a law or other writing; a paragraph; an
article; hence, the character §, often used to denote such a division.

    It is hardly possible to give a distinct view of his several
    arguments in distinct sections.


Locke.

(b) A distinct part of a country or people, community, class, or the
like; a part of a territory separated by geographical lines, or of a
people considered as distinct.

    The extreme section of one class consists of bigoted dotards, the
    extreme section of the other consists of shallow and reckless
    empirics.


Macaulay.

(c) One of the portions, of one square mile each, into which the public
lands of the United States are divided; one thirty-sixth part of a
township. These sections are subdivided into quarter sections for sale
under the homestead and preëmption laws.

3. (Geom.) The figure made up of all the points common to a superficies
and a solid which meet, or to two superficies which meet, or to two
lines which meet. In the first case the section is a superficies, in
the second a line, and in the third a point.

4. (Nat. Hist.) A division of a genus; a group of species separated by
some distinction from others of the same genus; -- often indicated by
the sign §.

5. (Mus.) A part of a musical period, composed of one or more phrases.
See Phrase.

6. The description or representation of anything as it would appear if
cut through by any intersecting plane; depiction of what is beyond a
plane passing through, or supposed to pass through, an object, as a
building, a machine, a succession of strata; profile.

In mechanical drawing, as in these Illustrations of a cannon, a
longitudinal section (a) usually represents the object as cut through
its center lengthwise and vertically; a cross or transverse section
(b), as cut crosswise and vertically; and a horizontal section (c), as
cut through its center horizontally. Oblique sections are made at
various angles. In architecture, a vertical section is a drawing
showing the interior, the thickness of the walls, etc., as if made on a
vertical plane passed through a building.

Angular sections (Math.), a branch of analysis which treats of the
relations of sines, tangents, etc., of arcs to the sines, tangents,
etc., of their multiples or of their parts. [R.] -- Conic sections.
(Geom.) See under Conic. -- Section liner (Drawing), an instrument to
aid in drawing a series of equidistant parallel lines, -- used in
representing sections. -- Thin section, a section or slice, as of
mineral, animal, or vegetable substance, thin enough to be transparent,
and used for study under the microscope.

Syn. -- Part; portion; division. -- Section, Part. The English more
commonly apply the word section to a part or portion of a body of men;
as, a section of the clergy, a small section of the Whigs, etc. In the
United States this use is less common, but another use, unknown or but
little known in England, is very frequent, as in the phrases "the
eastern section of our country," etc., the same sense being also given
to the adjective sectional; as, sectional feelings, interests, etc.

Sec"tion*al (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a section or distinct part
of larger body or territory; local.

    All sectional interests, or party feelings, it is hoped, will
    hereafter yield to schemes of ambition.


Story.

2. Consisting of sections, or capable of being divided into sections;
as, a sectional steam boiler.

Sec"tion*al*ism (?), n. A disproportionate regard for the interests
peculiar to a section of the country; local patriotism, as
distinguished from national. [U. S.]

Sec"tion*al"i*ty (?), n. The state or quality of being sectional;
sectionalism.

Sec"tion*al*ize (?), v. t. To divide according to geographical sections
or local interests. [U. S.]

    The principal results of the struggle were to sectionalize parties.


Nicolay & Hay (Life of Lincoln).

Sec"tion*al*ly, adv. In a sectional manner.

Sec"tion*ize (?), v. t. To form into sections. [R.]

Sect"ism (?), n. Devotion to a sect. [R.]

Sect"ist, n. One devoted to a sect; a sectary. [R.]

Sect"i*un`cle (?), n. A little or petty sect. [R.] "Some new sect or
sectiuncle." J. Martineau.

Sec"tor (?), n. [L., properly, a cutter, fr. secare, sectum, to cut:
cf. F. secteur. See Section.] 1. (Geom.) A part of a circle
comprehended between two radii and the included arc.

2. A mathematical instrument, consisting of two rulers connected at one
end by a joint, each arm marked with several scales, as of equal parts,
chords, sines, tangents, etc., one scale of each kind on each arm, and
all on lines radiating from the common center of motion. The sector is
used for plotting, etc., to any scale.

3. An astronomical instrument, the limb of which embraces a small
portion only of a circle, used for measuring differences of declination
too great for the compass of a micrometer. When it is used for
measuring zenith distances of stars, it is called a zenith sector.

Dip sector, an instrument used for measuring the dip of the horizon. --
Sector of a sphere, or Spherical sector, the solid generated by the
revolution of the sector of a circle about one of its radii, or, more
rarely, about any straight line drawn in the plane of the sector
through its vertex.

Sec"tor*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a sector; as, a sectoral circle.

Sec*to"ri*al (?), a. (Anat.) Adapted for cutting. -- n. A sectorial, or
carnassial, tooth.

Sec"u*lar (?), a. [OE. secular, seculer. L. saecularis, fr. saeculum a
race, generation, age, the times, the world; perhaps akin to E. soul:
cf. F. séculier.] 1. Coming or observed once in an age or a century.

    The secular year was kept but once a century.


Addison.

2. Pertaining to an age, or the progress of ages, or to a long period
of time; accomplished in a long progress of time; as, secular
inequality; the secular refrigeration of the globe.

3. Of or pertaining to this present world, or to things not spiritual
or holy; relating to temporal as distinguished from eternal interests;
not immediately or primarily respecting the soul, but the body;
worldly.

    New foes arise, Threatening to bind our souls with secular chains.


Milton.

4. (Eccl.) Not regular; not bound by monastic vows or rules; not
confined to a monastery, or subject to the rules of a religious
community; as, a secular priest.

    He tried to enforce a stricter discipline and greater regard for
    morals, both in the religious orders and the secular clergy.


Prescott.

5. Belonging to the laity; lay; not clerical.

    I speak of folk in secular estate.


Chaucer.

Secular equation (Astron.), the algebraic or numerical expression of
the magnitude of the inequalities in a planet's motion that remain
after the inequalities of a short period have been allowed for. --
Secular games (Rom. Antiq.), games celebrated, at long but irregular
intervals, for three days and nights, with sacrifices, theatrical
shows, combats, sports, and the like. -- Secular music, any music or
songs not adapted to sacred uses. -- Secular hymn or poem, a hymn or
poem composed for the secular games, or sung or rehearsed at those
games.

Sec"u*lar, n. 1. (Eccl.) A secular ecclesiastic, or one not bound by
monastic rules. Burke.

2. (Eccl.) A church official whose functions are confined to the vocal
department of the choir. Busby.

3. A layman, as distinguished from a clergyman.

Sec"u*lar*ism (?), n. 1. The state or quality of being secular; a
secular spirit; secularity.

2. The tenets or principles of the secularists.

Sec"u*lar*ist, n. One who theoretically rejects every form of religious
faith, and every kind of religious worship, and accepts only the facts
and influences which are derived from the present life; also, one who
believes that education and other matters of civil policy should be
managed without the introduction of a religious element.

Sec`u*lar"i*ty (?), n. [Cf.F. sécularité, LL. saecularitas.] Supreme
attention to the things of the present life; worldliness.

    A secularity of character which makes Christianity and its
    principal doctrines distasteful or unintelligible.


I. Taylor.

Sec`u*lar*i*za"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. sécularisation.] The act of
rendering secular, or the state of being rendered secular; conversion
from regular or monastic to secular; conversion from religious to lay
or secular possession and uses; as, the secularization of church
property.

Sec"u*lar*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Secularized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Secularizing (?).] [Cf. F. séculariser.] 1. To convert from regular or
monastic into secular; as, to secularize a priest or a monk.

2. To convert from spiritual to secular or common use; as, to
secularize a church, or church property.

    At the Reformation the abbey was secularized.


W. Coxe.

3. To make worldly or unspiritual. Bp. Horsley.

Sec"u*lar*ly, adv. In a secular or worldly manner.

Sec"u*lar*ness, n. The quality or state of being secular; worldliness;
worldly-mindedness.

Se"cund (?), a. [L. secundus following the course or current of wind or
water. See Second, a.] (Bot.) Arranged on one side only, as flowers or
leaves on a stalk. Gray.

Se*cun"date (?), v. t. [L. secundatus, p. p. of secundare to direct
favorably.] To make prosperous. [R.]

Sec`un*da"tion (?), n. Prosperity. [R.]

Sec"un*dine (?), n. [Cf. F. secondine.] 1. (Bot.) The second coat, or
integument, of an ovule, lying within the primine.

In the ripened seed the primine and secundine are usually united to
form the testa, or outer seed coat. When they remain distinct the
secundine becomes the mesosperm, as in the castor bean.

2. [Cf. F. secondines.] The afterbirth, or placenta and membranes; --
generally used in the plural.

Se*cun`do-gen"i*ture (?), n. [L. secundus second + genitura a
begetting, generation.] A right of inheritance belonging to a second
son; a property or possession so inherited.

    The kingdom of Naples . . . was constituted a secundo-geniture of
    Spain.


Bancroft.

Se*cur"a*ble (?), a. That may be secured.

Se*cure" (?), a. [L. securus; pref. se- without + cura care. See Cure
care, and cf. Sure, a.] 1. Free from fear, care, or anxiety; easy in
mind; not feeling suspicion or distrust; confident.

    But thou, secure of soul, unbent with woes.


Dryden.

2. Overconfident; incautious; careless; -- in a bad sense. Macaulay.

3. Confident in opinion; not entertaining, or not having reason to
entertain, doubt; certain; sure; -- commonly with of; as, secure of a
welcome.

    Confidence then bore thee on, secure Either to meet no danger, or
    to find Matter of glorious trial.


Milton.

4. Not exposed to danger; safe; -- applied to persons and things, and
followed by against or from. "Secure from fortune's blows." Dryden.

Syn. -- Safe; undisturbed; easy; sure; certain; assured; confident;
careless; heedless; inattentive.

Se*cure", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Secured (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Securing.]
1. To make safe; to relieve from apprehensions of, or exposure to,
danger; to guard; to protect.

    I spread a cloud before the victor's sight, Sustained the
    vanquished, and secured his flight.


Dryden.

2. To put beyond hazard of losing or of not receiving; to make certain;
to assure; to insure; -- frequently with against or from, rarely with
of; as, to secure a creditor against loss; to secure a debt by a
mortgage.

    It secures its possessor of eternal happiness.


T. Dick.

3. To make fast; to close or confine effectually; to render incapable
of getting loose or escaping; as, to secure a prisoner; to secure a
door, or the hatches of a ship.

4. To get possession of; to make one's self secure of; to acquire
certainly; as, to secure an estate.

Secure arms (Mil.), a command and a position in the manual of arms,
used in wet weather, the object being to guard the firearm from
becoming wet. The piece is turned with the barrel to the front and
grasped by the right hand at the lower band, the muzzle is dropped to
the front, and the piece held with the guard under the right arm, the
hand supported against the hip, and the thumb on the rammer.

Se*cure"ly, adv. In a secure manner; without fear or apprehension;
without danger; safely.

    His daring foe . . . securely him defied.


Milton.

Se*cure"ment (?), n. The act of securing; protection. [R.]

    Society condemns the securement in all cases of perpetual
    protection by means of perpetual imprisonment.


C. A. Ives.

Se*cure"ness, n. The condition or quality of being secure; exemption
from fear; want of vigilance; security.

Se*cur"er (?), n. One who, or that which, secures.

||Sec`u*rif"e*ra (?), n. pl. [NL., from L. securis an ax + ferre to
||bear.] (Zoöl.) The Serrifera.

Se*cu"ri*form (?), a. [L. securis an ax or hatchet + -form: cf. F.
sécuriforme.] (Nat. Hist.) Having the form of an ax or hatchet.

Se*cu"ri*palp (?), n. [L. securis ax, hatchet + E. palp.] (Zoöl.) One
of a family of beetles having the maxillary palpi terminating in a
hatchet- shaped joint.

Se*cu"ri*ty (?), n.; pl. Securities (#). [L. securitas: cf. F.
sécurité. See Secure, and cf. Surety.] 1. The condition or quality of
being secure; secureness. Specifically: (a) Freedom from apprehension,
anxiety, or care; confidence of power or safety; hence, assurance;
certainty.

    His trembling hand had lost the ease, Which marks security to
    please.


Sir W. Scott.

(b) Hence, carelessness; negligence; heedlessness.

    He means, my lord, that we are too remiss, Whilst Bolingbroke,
    through our security, Grows strong and great in substance and in
    power.


Shak.

(c) Freedom from risk; safety.

    Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard, From firm security.


Shak.

    Some . . . alleged that we should have no security for our trade.


Swift.

2. That which secures or makes safe; protection; guard; defense.
Specifically: (a) Something given, deposited, or pledged, to make
certain the fulfillment of an obligation, the performance of a
contract, the payment of a debt, or the like; surety; pledge.

    Those who lent him money lent it on no security but his bare word.


Macaulay.

(b) One who becomes surety for another, or engages himself for the
performance of another's obligation.

3. An evidence of debt or of property, as a bond, a certificate of
stock, etc.; as, government securities.

Syn. -- Protection; defense; guard; shelter; safety; certainty; ease;
assurance; carelessness; confidence; surety; pledge; bail.

Se*dan" (?), n. [Said to be named from Sedan, in France, where it was
first made, and whence it was introduced into England in the time of
King Charles I.] A portable chair or covered vehicle for carrying a
single person, -- usually borne on poles by two men. Called also sedan
chair.

Se*date" (?), a. [L. sedatus, p. p. of sedare, sedatum, to allay, calm,
causative of sedere to sit. See Sit.] Undisturbed by passion or
caprice; calm; tranquil; serene; not passionate or giddy; composed;
staid; as, a sedate soul, mind, or temper.

    Disputation carries away the mind from that calm and sedate temper
    which is so necessary to contemplate truth.


I. Watts.

    Whatsoever we feel and know Too sedate for outward show.


Wordsworth.

Syn. -- Settled; composed; calm; quiet; tranquil; still; serene;
unruffled; undisturbed; contemplative; sober; serious.

-- Se*date"ly, adv. -- Se*date"ness, n.

Se*da"tion (?), n. [L. sedatio.] The act of calming, or the state of
being calm. [R.] Coles.

Sed"a*tive (?), a. [Cf. F. sédatif.] Tending to calm, moderate, or
tranquilize; specifically (Med.), allaying irritability and irritation;
assuaging pain.

Sed"a*tive, n. (Med.) A remedy which allays irritability and
irritation, and irritative activity or pain.

Se"dent (?), a. [L. sedens, - entis, p. pr. of sedere to sit. See Sit.]
Sitting; inactive; quiet. [R.]

Sed"en*ta*ri*ly (?), adv. In a sedentary manner.

Sed"en*ta*ri*ness, n. Quality of being sedentary.

Sed"en*ta*ry (?), a. [L. sedentarius, fr. sedere to sit: cf. F.
seédentaire. See Sedent.] 1. Accustomed to sit much or long; as, a
sedentary man. "Sedentary, scholastic sophists." Bp. Warburton.

2. Characterized by, or requiring, much sitting; as, a sedentary
employment; a sedentary life.

    Any education that confined itself to sedentary pursuits was
    essentially imperfect.


Beaconsfield.

3. Inactive; motionless; sluggish; hence, calm; tranquil. [R.] "The
sedentary earth." Milton.

    The soul, considered abstractly from its passions, is of a remiss,
    sedentary nature.


Spectator.

4. Caused by long sitting. [Obs.] "Sedentary numbness." Milton.

5. (Zoöl.) Remaining in one place, especially when firmly attached to
some object; as, the oyster is a sedentary mollusk; the barnacles are
sedentary crustaceans.

Sedentary spider (Zoöl.), one of a tribe of spiders which rest
motionless until their prey is caught in their web.

||Se*de"runt (?), n. [L., they sat, fr. sedere to sit.] A sitting, as
||of a court or other body.

    'T is pity we have not Burns's own account of that long sederunt.


Prof. Wilson.

Acts of sederunt (Scots Law), ordinances of the Court of Session for
the ordering of processes and expediting of justice. Bell.

Sedge (?), n. [OE. segge, AS. secg; akin to LG. segge; -- probably
named from its bladelike appearance, and akin to L. secare to cut, E.
saw a cutting instrument; cf. Ir. seisg, W. hesg. Cf. Hassock, Saw the
instrument.] 1. (Bot.) Any plant of the genus Carex, perennial,
endogenous, innutritious herbs, often growing in dense tufts in marshy
places. They have triangular jointless stems, a spiked inflorescence,
and long grasslike leaves which are usually rough on the margins and
midrib. There are several hundred species.

The name is sometimes given to any other plant of the order Cyperaceæ,
which includes Carex, Cyperus, Scirpus, and many other genera of
rushlike plants.

2. (Zoöl.) A flock of herons.

Sedge hen (Zoöl.), the clapper rail. See under 5th Rail. -- Sedge
warbler (Zoöl.), a small European singing bird (Acrocephalus
phragmitis). It often builds its nest among reeds; -- called also sedge
bird, sedge wren, night warbler, and Scotch nightingale.

Sedged (?), a. Made or composed of sedge.

    With your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks.


Shak.

Sedg"y (?), a. Overgrown with sedge.

    On the gentle Severn\'b6s sedgy bank.


Shak.

||Se*dil"i*a (?), n. pl.; sing. Sedile (&?;). [L. sedile a seat.]
||(Arch.) Seats in the chancel of a church near the altar for the
||officiating clergy during intervals of service. Hook.

Sed"i*ment (?), n. [F. sédiment, L. sedimentum a settling, fr. sedere
to sit, to settle. See Sit.] 1. The matter which subsides to the
bottom, from water or any other liquid; settlings; lees; dregs.

2. (Geol.) The material of which sedimentary rocks are formed.

Sed`i*men"tal (?), a. Sedimentary.

Sed`i*men"ta*ry (?), a. [Cf. F. sédimentaire.] Of or pertaining to
sediment; formed by sediment; containing matter that has subsided.

Sedimentary rocks. (Geol.) See Aqueous rocks, under Aqueous.

Sed`i*men*ta"tion (?), n. The act of depositing a sediment;
specifically (Geol.), the deposition of the material of which
sedimentary rocks are formed.

Se*di"tion (?), n. [OE. sedicioun, OF. sedition, F. sédition, fr. L.
seditio, originally, a going aside; hence, an insurrectionary
separation; pref. se-, sed-, aside + itio a going, fr. ire, itum, to
go. Cf. Issue.] 1. The raising of commotion in a state, not amounting
to insurrection; conduct tending to treason, but without an overt act;
excitement of discontent against the government, or of resistance to
lawful authority.

    In soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate The cockle of
    rebellion, insolence, sedition.


Shak.

    Noisy demagogues who had been accused of sedition.


Macaulay.

2. Dissension; division; schism. [Obs.]

    Now the works of the flesh are manifest, . . . emulations, wrath,
    strife, seditions, heresies.


Gal. v. 19, 20.

Syn. -- Insurrection; tumult; uproar; riot; rebellion; revolt. See
Insurrection.

Se*di"tion*a*ry (?), n. An inciter or promoter of sedition. Bp. Hall.

Se*di"tious (?), a.[L. seditiosus: cf. F. séditieux.] 1. Of or
pertaining to sedition; partaking of the nature of, or tending to
excite, sedition; as, seditious behavior; seditious strife; seditious
words.

2. Disposed to arouse, or take part in, violent opposition to lawful
authority; turbulent; factious; guilty of sedition; as, seditious
citizens.

-- Se*di"tious*ly, adv. -- Se*di"tious*ness, n.

Sed"litz (?), a. Same as Seidlitz.

Se*duce" (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seduced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seducing
(?).] [L. seducere, seductum; pref. se- aside + ducere to lead. See
Duke.] 1. To draw aside from the path of rectitude and duty in any
manner; to entice to evil; to lead astray; to tempt and lead to
iniquity; to corrupt.

    For me, the gold of France did not seduce.


Shak.

2. Specifically, to induce to surrender chastity; to debauch by means
of solicitation.

Syn. -- To allure; entice; tempt; attract; mislead; decoy; inveigle.
See Allure.

Se*duce"ment (?), n. 1. The act of seducing.

2. The means employed to seduce, as flattery, promises, deception,
etc.; arts of enticing or corrupting. Pope.

Se*du"cer (?), n. One who, or that which, seduces; specifically, one
who prevails over the chastity of a woman by enticements and
persuasions.

    He whose firm faith no reason could remove, Will melt before that
    soft seducer, love.


Dryden.

Se*du"ci*ble (?), a. Capable of being seduced; corruptible.

Se*du"cing (?), a. Seductive. "Thy sweet seducing charms." Cowper. --
Se*du"cing*ly, adv.

Se*duc*tion (?), n. [L. seductio: cf. F. séduction. See Seduce.] 1. The
act of seducing; enticement to wrong doing; specifically, the offense
of inducing a woman to consent to unlawful sexual intercourse, by
enticements which overcome her scruples; the wrong or crime of
persuading a woman to surrender her chastity.

2. That which seduces, or is adapted to seduce; means of leading
astray; as, the seductions of wealth.

Se*duc"tive (?), a. Tending to lead astray; apt to mislead by
flattering appearances; tempting; alluring; as, a seductive offer.

    This may enable us to understand how seductive is the influence of
    example.


Sir W. Hamilton.

Se*duc"tive*ly, adv. In a seductive manner.

Se*duc"tress (?), n. A woman who seduces.

Se*du"li*ty (?), n. [L. sedulitas. See Sedulous.] The quality or state
of being sedulous; diligent and assiduous application; constant
attention; unremitting industry; sedulousness.

    The industrious bee, by his sedulity in summer, lives in honey all
    the winter.


Feltham.

Sed"u*lous (?; 135), a. [L. sedulus, perhaps from sedere to sit, and so
akin to E. sit.] Diligent in application or pursuit; constant, steady,
and persevering in business, or in endeavors to effect an object;
steadily industrious; assiduous; as, the sedulous bee.

    What signifies the sound of words in prayer, without the affection
    of the heart, and a sedulous application of the proper means that
    may naturally lead us to such an end?


L'Estrange.

Syn. -- Assiduous; diligent; industrious; laborious; unremitting;
untiring; unwearied; persevering.

-- Sed"u*lous*ly, adv. -- Sed"u*lous*ness, n.

||Se"dum (?), n. [NL., fr. L. sedere to sit; so called in allusion to
||the manner in which the plants attach themselves to rocks and walls.]
||(Bot.) A genus of plants, mostly perennial, having succulent leaves
||and cymose flowers; orpine; stonecrop. Gray.

See (?), n. [OE. se, see, OF. se, sed, sied, fr. L. sedes a seat, or
the kindred sedere to sit. See Sit, and cf. Siege.] 1. A seat; a site;
a place where sovereign power is exercised. [Obs.] Chaucer.

    Jove laughed on Venus from his sovereign see.


Spenser.

2. Specifically: (a) The seat of episcopal power; a diocese; the
jurisdiction of a bishop; as, the see of New York. (b) The seat of an
archbishop; a province or jurisdiction of an archbishop; as, an
archiepiscopal see. (c) The seat, place, or office of the pope, or
Roman pontiff; as, the papal see. (d) The pope or his court at Rome;
as, to appeal to the see of Rome.

Apostolic see. See under Apostolic.

See (s), v. t. [imp. Saw (s); p. p. Seen (sn); p. pr. & vb. n. Seeing.]
[OE. seen, sen, seon, AS. seón; akin to OFries. sa, D. zien, OS. & OHG.
sehan, G. sehen, Icel. sj, Sw. se, Dan. see, Goth. saíhwan, and
probably to L. sequi to follow (and so originally meaning, to follow
with the eyes). Gr. "e`pesqai, Skr. sac. Cf. Sight, Sue to follow.] 1.
To perceive by the eye; to have knowledge of the existence and apparent
qualities of by the organs of sight; to behold; to descry; to view.

    I will now turn aside, and see this great sight.


Ex. iii. 3.

2. To perceive by mental vision; to form an idea or conception of; to
note with the mind; to observe; to discern; to distinguish; to
understand; to comprehend; to ascertain.

    Go, I pray thee, see whether it be well with thy brethren.


Gen. xxxvii. 14.

    Jesus saw that he answered discreetly.


Mark xii. 34.

    Who's so gross That seeth not this palpable device?


Shak.

3. To follow with the eyes, or as with the eyes; to watch; to regard
attentively; to look after. Shak.

    I had a mind to see him out, and therefore did not care for
    contradicting him.


Addison.

4. To have an interview with; especially, to make a call upon; to
visit; as, to go to see a friend.

    And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death.


1 Sam. xv. 35.

5. To fall in with; to meet or associate with; to have intercourse or
communication with; hence, to have knowledge or experience of; as, to
see military service.

    Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us,
    and the years wherein we have seen evil.


Ps. xc. 15.

    Verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall
    never see death.


John viii. 51.

    Improvement in wisdom and prudence by seeing men.


Locke.

6. To accompany in person; to escort; to wait upon; as, to see one
home; to see one aboard the cars.

God you (him, or me, etc.) see, God keep you (him, me, etc.) in his
sight; God protect you. [Obs.] Chaucer. -- To see (anything) out, to
see (it) to the end; to be present at, or attend, to the end. -- To see
stars, to see flashes of light, like stars; -- sometimes the result of
concussion of the head. [Colloq.] -- To see (one) through, to help,
watch, or guard (one) to the end of a course or an undertaking.

See, v. i. 1. To have the power of sight, or of perceiving by the
proper organs; to possess or employ the sense of vision; as, he sees
distinctly.

    Whereas I was blind, now I see.


John ix. 25.

2. Figuratively: To have intellectual apprehension; to perceive; to
know; to understand; to discern; -- often followed by a preposition, as
through, or into.

    For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not
    might see; and that they which see might be made blind.


John ix. 39.

    Many sagacious persons will find us out, . . . and see through all
    our fine pretensions.


Tillotson.

3. To be attentive; to take care; to give heed; -- generally with to;
as, to see to the house.

    See that ye fall not out by the way.


Gen. xlv. 24.

Let me see, Let us see, are used to express consideration, or to
introduce the particular consideration of a subject, or some scheme or
calculation.

    Cassio's a proper man, let me see now, - To get his place.


Shak.

See is sometimes used in the imperative for look, or behold. "See. see!
upon the banks of Boyne he stands." Halifax.

To see about a thing, to pay attention to it; to consider it. -- To see
on, to look at. [Obs.] "She was full more blissful on to see." Chaucer.
-- To see to. (a) To look at; to behold; to view. [Obs.] "An altar by
Jordan, a great altar to see to" Josh. xxii. 10. (b) To take care
about; to look after; as, to see to a fire.

Seed (sd), n.; pl. Seed or Seeds (#). [OE. seed, sed, AS. sd, fr. swan
to sow; akin to D. zaad seed, G. saat, Icel. sð, sæði, Goth. manasþs
seed of men, world. See Sow to scatter seed, and cf. Colza.] 1. (Bot.)
(a) A ripened ovule, consisting of an embryo with one or more
integuments, or coverings; as, an apple seed; a currant seed. By
germination it produces a new plant. (b) Any small seedlike fruit,
though it may consist of a pericarp, or even a calyx, as well as the
seed proper; as, parsnip seed; thistle seed.

    And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
    seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed
    is in itself.


Gen. i. 11.

The seed proper has an outer and an inner coat, and within these the
kernel or nucleus. The kernel is either the embryo alone, or the embryo
inclosed in the albumen, which is the material for the nourishment of
the developing embryo. The scar on a seed, left where the stem parted
from it, is called the hilum, and the closed orifice of the ovule, the
micropyle.

2. (Physiol.) The generative fluid of the male; semen; sperm; -- not
used in the plural.

3. That from which anything springs; first principle; original; source;
as, the seeds of virtue or vice.

4. The principle of production.

    Praise of great acts he scatters as a seed, Which may the like in
    coming ages breed.


Waller.

5. Progeny; offspring; children; descendants; as, the seed of Abraham;
the seed of David.

In this sense the word is applied to one person, or to any number
collectively, and admits of the plural form, though rarely used in the
plural.

6. Race; generation; birth.

    Of mortal seed they were not held.


Waller.

Seed bag (Artesian well), a packing to prevent percolation of water
down the bore hole. It consists of a bag encircling the tubing and
filled with flax seed, which swells when wet and fills the space
between the tubing and the sides of the hole. -- Seed bud (Bot.), the
germ or rudiment of the plant in the embryo state; the ovule. -- Seed
coat (Bot.), the covering of a seed. -- Seed corn, or Seed grain
(Bot.), corn or grain for seed. -- Seed down (Bot.), the soft hairs on
certain seeds, as cotton seed. -- Seed drill. See 6th Drill, 2 (a). --
Seed eater (Zoöl.), any finch of the genera Sporophila, and Crithagra.
They feed mainly on seeds. -- Seed gall (Zoöl.), any gall which
resembles a seed, formed on the leaves of various plants, usually by
some species of Phylloxera. -- Seed leaf (Bot.), a cotyledon. -- Seed
lobe (Bot.), a cotyledon; a seed leaf. -- Seed oil, oil expressed from
the seeds of plants. -- Seed oyster, a young oyster, especially when of
a size suitable for transplantation to a new locality. -- Seed pearl, a
small pearl of little value. -- Seed plat, or Seed plot, the ground on
which seeds are sown, to produce plants for transplanting; a nursery.
-- Seed stalk (Bot.), the stalk of an ovule or seed; a funicle. -- Seed
tick (Zoöl.), one of several species of ticks resembling seeds in form
and color. -- Seed vessel (Bot.), that part of a plant which contains
the seeds; a pericarp. -- Seed weevil (Zoöl.), any one of numerous
small weevils, especially those of the genus Apion, which live in the
seeds of various plants. -- Seed wool, cotton wool not yet cleansed of
its seeds. [Southern U.S.]

Seed (?), v. i. 1. To sow seed.

2. To shed the seed. Mortimer.

3. To grow to maturity, and produce seed.

    Many interests have grown up, and seeded, and twisted their roots
    in the crevices of many wrongs.


Landor.

Seed, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seeded; p. pr. & vb. n. Seeding.] 1. To
sprinkle with seed; to plant seeds in; to sow; as, to seed a field.

2. To cover thinly with something scattered; to ornament with seedlike
decorations.

    A sable mantle seeded with waking eyes.


B. Jonson.

To seed down, to sow with grass seed.

Seed"box` (?), n. (Bot.) (a) A capsule. (b) A plant (Ludwigia
alternifolia) which has somewhat cubical or box-shaped capsules.

Seed"cake` (?), n. A sweet cake or cooky containing aromatic seeds, as
caraway. Tusser.

Seed"cod` (?), n. A seedlip. [Prov. Eng.]

Seed"er (?), n. One who, or that which, sows or plants seed.

Seed`i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being seedy, shabby, or
worn out; a state of wretchedness or exhaustion. [Colloq.] G. Eliot.

    What is called seediness, after a debauch, is a plain proof that
    nature has been outraged.


J. S. Blackie.

Seed"-lac` (?), n. A species of lac. See the Note under Lac.

Seed"less, a. Without seed or seeds.

Seed"ling (?), n. (Bot.) A plant reared from the seed, as distinguished
from one propagated by layers, buds, or the like.

{ Seed"lip` (?), Seed"lop` (?), } n. [AS. sdleáp; sd seed + leáp
basket.] A vessel in which a sower carries the seed to be scattered.
[Prov. Eng.]

Seed"man (?), See Seedsman.

Seed"ness, n. Seedtime. [Obs.] Shak.

Seeds"man (?), n.; pl. Seedsmen (-men). 1. A sower; one who sows or
scatters seed.

    The seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain.


Shak.

2. A person who deals in seeds.

Seed"time` (?), n. [AS. sdtma.] The season proper for sowing.

    While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat,
    and summer and winter, and day and night, shall not cease.


Gen. viii. 22.

Seed"y (?), a. [Compar. Seedier (?); superl. Seediest.] 1. Abounding
with seeds; bearing seeds; having run to seeds.

2. Having a peculiar flavor supposed to be derived from the weeds
growing among the vines; -- said of certain kinds of French brandy.

3. Old and worn out; exhausted; spiritless; also, poor and miserable
looking; shabbily clothed; shabby looking; as, he looked seedy; a seedy
coat. [Colloq.]

    Little Flanigan here . . . is a little seedy, as we say among us
    that practice the law.


Goldsmith.

Seedy toe, an affection of a horse's foot, in which a cavity filled
with horn powder is formed between the laminæ and the wall of the hoof.

See"ing (?), conj. (but originally a present participle). In view of
the fact (that); considering; taking into account (that); insmuch as;
since; because; - - followed by a dependent clause; as, he did well,
seeing that he was so young.

    Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me?


Gen. xxvi. 27.

Seek (?), a. Sick. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Seek, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sought (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seeking.] [OE.
seken, AS. scan, scean; akin to OS. skian, LG. söken, D. zoeken, OHG.
suohhan, G. suchen, Icel. sækja, Sw. söka, Dan. söge, Goth. skjan, and
E. sake. Cf. Beseech, Ransack, Sagacious, Sake, Soc.] 1. To go in
search of; to look for; to search for; to try to find.

    The man asked him, saying, What seekest thou? And he said, I seek
    my brethren.


Gen. xxxvii. 15, 16.

2. To inquire for; to ask for; to solicit; to beseech.

    Others, tempting him, sought of him a sign.


Luke xi. 16.

3. To try to acquire or gain; to strive after; to aim at; as, to seek
wealth or fame; to seek one's life.

4. To try to reach or come to; to go to; to resort to.

    Seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal.


Amos v. 5.

    Since great Ulysses sought the Phrygian plains.


Pope.

Seek (?), v. i. To make search or inquiry; to endeavor to make
discovery.

    Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read.


Isa. xxxiv. 16.

To seek, needing to seek or search; hence, unprepared. "Unpracticed,
unprepared, and still to seek." Milton. [Obs.] -- To seek after, to
make pursuit of; to attempt to find or take. -- To seek for, to
endeavor to find. -- To seek to, to apply to; to resort to; to court.
[Obs.] "All the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom." 1 Kings
x. 24. -- To seek upon, to make strict inquiry after; to follow up; to
persecute. [Obs.]

    To seek Upon a man and do his soul unrest.


Chaucer.

Seek"er (?), n. 1. One who seeks; that which is used in seeking or
searching.

2. (Eccl.) One of a small heterogeneous sect of the 17th century, in
Great Britain, who professed to be seeking the true church, ministry,
and sacraments.

    A skeptic [is] ever seeking and never finds, like our new upstart
    sect of Seekers.


Bullokar.

Seek"-no-fur`ther (?), n. A kind of choice winter apple, having a
subacid taste; -- formerly called go- no-further.

Seek"-sor`row (?), n. One who contrives to give himself vexation.
[Archaic.] Sir P. Sidney.

Seel (sl), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seeled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seeling.]
[F. siller, ciller, fr. cil an eyelash, L. cilium.] 1. (Falconry) To
close the eyes of (a hawk or other bird) by drawing through the lids
threads which were fastened over the head. Bacon.

    Fools climb to fall: fond hopes, like seeled doves for want of
    better light, mount till they end their flight with falling.


J. Reading.

2. Hence, to shut or close, as the eyes; to blind.

    Come, seeling night, Scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day.


Shak.

    Cold death, with a violent fate, his sable eyes did seel.


Chapman.

Seel, v. i. [Cf. LG. sielen to lead off water, F. siller to run ahead,
to make headway, E. sile, v.t.] To incline to one side; to lean; to
roll, as a ship at sea. [Obs.] Sir W. Raleigh.

{ Seel (?), Seel"ing, } n. The rolling or agitation of a ship in a
storm. [Obs.] Sandys.

Seel, n. [AS. sl, from sl good, prosperous. See Silly.] 1. Good
fortune; favorable opportunity; prosperity. [Obs.] "So have I seel".
Chaucer.

2. Time; season; as, hay seel. [Prov. Eng.]

Seel"i*ly (?), adv. In a silly manner. [Obs.]

Seel"y (?), a. See Silly. [Obs.] Spenser.

Seem (sm), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Seemed (smd); p. pr. & vb. n. Seeming.]
[OE. semen to seem, to become, befit, AS. sman to satisfy, pacify; akin
to Icel. sæma to honor, to bear with, conform to, sæmr becoming, fit,
sma to beseem, to befit, sama to beseem, semja to arrange, settle, put
right, Goth. samjan to please, and to E. same. The sense is probably
due to the adj. seemly. &radic;191. See Same, a., and cf. Seemly.] To
appear, or to appear to be; to have a show or semblance; to present an
appearance; to look; to strike one's apprehension or fancy as being; to
be taken as. "It now seemed probable." Macaulay.

    Thou picture of what thou seem'st.


Shak.

    All seemed well pleased; all seemed, but were not all.


Milton.

    There is a way which seemeth right unto a man; but the end thereof
    are the ways of death.


Prov. xiv. 12.

It seems, it appears; it is understood as true; it is said.

    A prince of Italy, it seems, entertained his mistress on a great
    lake.


Addison.

Syn. -- To appear; look. -- Seem, Appear. To appear has reference to a
thing's being presented to our view; as, the sun appears; to seem is
connected with the idea of semblance, and usually implies an inference
of our mind as to the probability of a thing's being so; as, a storm
seems to be coming. "The story appears to be true," means that the
facts, as presented, go to show its truth; "the story seems to be
true," means that it has the semblance of being so, and we infer that
it is true. "His first and principal care being to appear unto his
people such as he would have them be, and to be such as he appeared."
Sir P. Sidney.

    Ham. Ay, madam, it is common. Queen. If it be, Why seems it so
    particular with thee? Ham. Seems, madam! Nay, it is; I know not
    "seems."


Shak.

Seem, v. t. To befit; to beseem. [Obs.] Spenser.

Seem"er (?), n. One who seems; one who carries or assumes an appearance
or semblance.

    Hence shall we see, If power change purpose, what our seemers be.


Shak.

Seem"ing, a. Having a semblance, whether with or without reality;
apparent; specious; befitting; as, seeming friendship; seeming truth.

    My lord, you have lost a friend indeed; And I dare swear you borrow
    not that face Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your own.


Shak.

Seem"ing, n. 1. Appearance; show; semblance; fair appearance;
speciousness.

    These keep Seeming and savor all the winter long.


Shak.

2. Apprehension; judgment. [Obs.] Chaucer.

    Nothing more clear unto their seeming.


Hooker.

    His persuasive words, impregned With reason, to her seeming.


Milton.

Seem"ing*ly, adv. In appearance; in show; in semblance; apparently;
ostensibly.

    This the father seemingly complied with.


Addison.

Seem"ing*ness, n. Semblance; fair appearance; plausibility. Sir K.
Digby.

Seem"less, a. Unseemly. [Obs.] Spenser.

Seem"li*ly (?), adv. In a seemly manner. [Obs.]

Seem"li*ness, n. The quality or state of being seemly: comeliness;
propriety.

<! p. 1304 !>

Seem"ly (?), a. [Compar.Seemlier (&?;); superl. Seeliest.] [Icel.
s&?;miligr, fr. s&?;mr becoming, fit; akin to samr same, E. same; the
sense being properly, the same or like, hence, fitting. See Seem, v.
i.] Suited to the object, occasion, purpose, or character; suitable;
fit; becoming; comely; decorous.

    He had a seemly nose.


Chaucer.

    I am a woman, lacking wit To make a seemly answer to such persons.


Shak.

    Suspense of judgment and exercise of charity were safer and
    seemlier for Christian men than the hot pursuit of these
    controversies.


Hooker.

Syn. -- Becoming; fit; suitable; proper; appropriate; congruous; meet;
decent; decorous.

Seem"ly (?), adv. [Compar. Seemlier; superl. Seemliest.] In a decent or
suitable manner; becomingly.

    Suddenly a men before him stood, Not rustic as before, but seemlier
    clad, As one in city or court or place bred.


Milton.

Seem"ly*hed (?), n. [See -hood.] Comely or decent appearance. [Obs.]
Rom. of R. Spenser.

Seen (?), p. p. of See.

Seen, a. Versed; skilled; accomplished. [Obs.]

    Well seen in every science that mote be.


Spenser.

    Noble Boyle, not less in nature seen, Than his great brother read
    in states and men.


Dryden.

{ Seep (?), or Sipe (?) }, v. i. [AS. span to distill.] To run or soak
through fine pores and interstices; to ooze. [Scot. & U. S.]

    Water seeps up through the sidewalks.


G. W. Cable.

{ Seep"age (?), or Sip"age }, n. Water that seeped or oozed through a
porous soil. [Scot. & U. S.]

{ Seep"y (?), or Sip"y }, a. Oozy; -- applied to land under cultivation
that is not well drained.

Seer (sr), a. Sore; painful. [Prov. Eng.] Ray.

Se"er (s"r), n. One who sees. Addison.

Seer (sr), n. [From See.] A person who foresees events; a prophet.
Milton.

Seer"ess, n. A female seer; a prophetess.

Seer"fish` (-fsh), n. (Zoöl.) A scombroid food fish of Madeira (Cybium
Commersonii).

Seer"hand (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] A kind of muslin of a texture
between nainsook and mull.

Seer"ship, n. The office or quality of a seer.

Seer"suck`er (?), n. A light fabric, originally made in the East
Indies, of silk and linen, usually having alternating stripes, and a
slightly craped or puckered surface; also, a cotton fabric of similar
appearance.

Seer"wood` (?), n. [See Sear.] Dry wood. [Written also searwood.]
[Obs.] Dryden.

See"saw` (?), n. [Probably a reduplication of saw, to express the
alternate motion to and fro, as in the act of sawing.] 1. A play among
children in which they are seated upon the opposite ends of a plank
which is balanced in the middle, and move alternately up and down.

2. A plank or board adjusted for this play.

3. A vibratory or reciprocating motion.

    He has been arguing in a circle; there is thus a seesaw between the
    hypothesis and fact.


Sir W. Hamilton.

4. (Whist.) Same as Crossruff.

See"saw`, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Seesawad (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seesawing.]
To move with a reciprocating motion; to move backward and forward, or
upward and downward.

See"saw`, v. t. To cause to move backward and forward in seesaw
fashion.

    He seesaws himself to and fro.


Ld. Lytton.

See"saw`, a. Moving up and down, or to and fro; having a reciprocating
motion.

Seet (?), obs. imp. of Sit. Sate; sat. Chaucer.

Seeth (?), obs. imp. of Seethe. Chaucer.

Seethe (?), v. t. [imp. Seethed (?) (Sod (&?;), obs.); p. p. Seethed,
Sodden (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Seething.] [OE. sethen, AS. seó&?;an;
akin to D. sieden, OHG. siodan, G. sieden, Icel. sj&?;&?;a, Sw. sjuda,
Dan. syde, Goth. saubs a burnt offering. Cf. Sod, n., Sodden, Suds.] To
decoct or prepare for food in hot liquid; to boil; as, to seethe flesh.
[Written also seeth.]

    Set on the great pot, and seethe pottage for the sons of the
    prophets.


2 Kings iv. 38.

Seethe, v. i. To be a state of ebullition or violent commotion; to be
hot; to boil. 1 Sam. ii. 13.

    A long Pointe, round which the Mississippi used to whirl, and
    seethe, and foam.


G. W. Cable.

Seeth"er (?), n. A pot for boiling things; a boiler.

    Like burnished gold the little seether shone.


Dryden.

Seg (?), n. [See Sedge.] (Bot.) 1. Sedge. [Obs.]

2. The gladen, and other species of Iris. Prior.

Seg, n. [Probably from the root of L. secare to cut.] A castrated bull.
[Prov. Eng. & Scot.] Halliwell.

Se*gar" (?), n. See Cigar.

Seg"gar (?), n. [Prov. E. saggard a seggar, seggard a sort of riding
surtout, contr. fr. safeguard.] A case or holder made of fire clay, in
which fine pottery is inclosed while baking in the kin. [Written also
saggar, sagger, and segger.] Ure.

Segge (?), n. (Zoöl.) The hedge sparrow. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Seg"ment (?), n. [L. segmentum, fr. secare to cut, cut off: cf. F.
segment. See Saw a cutting instrument.] 1. One of the parts into which
any body naturally separates or is divided; a part divided or cut off;
a section; a portion; as, a segment of an orange; a segment of a
compound or divided leaf.

2. (Geom.) A part cut off from a figure by a line or plane; especially,
that part of a circle contained between a chord and an arc of that
circle, or so much of the circle as is cut off by the chord; as, the
segment acb in the Illustration.

3. (Mach.) (a) A piece in the form of the sector of a circle, or part
of a ring; as, the segment of a sectional fly wheel or flywheel rim.
(b) A segment gear.

4. (Biol.) (a) One of the cells or division formed by segmentation, as
in egg cleavage or in fissiparous cell formation. (b) One of the
divisions, rings, or joints into which many animal bodies are divided;
a somite; a metamere; a somatome.

Segment gear, a piece for receiving or communicating reciprocating
motion from or to a cogwheel, consisting of a sector of a circular
gear, or ring, having cogs on the periphery, or face. -- Segment of a
line, the part of a line contained between two points on it. -- Segment
of a sphere, the part of a sphere cut off by a plane, or included
between two parallel planes. -- Ventral segment. (Acoustics) See Loor,
n., 5.

Seg"ment (?), v. i. (Biol.) To divide or separate into parts in growth;
to undergo segmentation, or cleavage, as in the segmentation of the
ovum.

Seg*men"tal (?), a. 1. Relating to, or being, a segment.

2. (Anat. & Zoöl.) (a) Of or pertaining to the segments of animals; as,
a segmental duct; segmental papillæ. (b) Of or pertaining to the
segmental organs.

Segmental duct (Anat.), the primitive duct of the embryonic excretory
organs which gives rise to the Wolffian duct and ureter; the pronephric
duct. -- Segmental organs. (a) (Anat.) The embryonic excretory organs
of vertebrates, consisting primarily of the segmental tubes and
segmental ducts. (b) (Zoöl.) The tubular excretory organs, a pair of
which often occur in each of several segments in annelids. They serve
as renal organs, and often, also, as oviducts and sperm ducts. See
Illust. under Sipunculacea. -- Segmental tubes (Anat.), the tubes which
primarily open into the segmental duct, some of which become the
urinary tubules of the adult.

Seg`men*ta"tion (?), n. The act or process of dividing into segments;
specifically (Biol.), a self-division into segments as a result of
growth; cell cleavage; cell multiplication; endogenous cell formation.

Segmentation cavity (Biol.), the cavity formed by the arrangement of
the cells in segmentation or cleavage of the ovum; the cavity of the
blastosphere. In the gastrula stage, the segmentation cavity in which
the mesoblast is formed lies between the entoblast and ectoblast. See
Illust. of Invagination. -- Segmentation nucleus (Biol.), the body
formed by fusion of the male and female pronucleus in an impregnated
ovum. See the Note under Pronucleus. -- Segmentation of the ovum, or
Egg cleavage (Biol.), the process by which the embryos of all the
higher plants and animals are derived from the germ cell. In the
simplest case, that of small ova destitute of food yolk, the ovum or
egg divides into two similar halves or segments (blastomeres), each of
these again divides into two, and so on, thus giving rise to a mass of
cells (mulberry mass, or morula), all equal and similar, from the
growth and development of which the future animal is to be formed. This
constitutes regular segmentation. Quite frequently, however, the
equality and regularity of cleavage is interfered with by the presence
of food yolk, from which results unequal segmentation. See Holoblastic,
Meroblastic, Alecithal, Centrolecithal, Ectolecithal, and Ovum. --
Segmentation sphere (Biol.), the blastosphere, or morula. See Morula.

Seg"ment*ed (?), a. Divided into segments or joints; articulated.

{ Seg"ni*tude (?), Seg"ni*ty (?) }, n. [L. segnitas, fr. segnis slow,
sluggish.] Sluggishness; dullness; inactivity. [Obs.]

||Se"gno (?), n. [It. See Sign.] (Mus.) A sign. See Al segno, and Dal
||segno.

Se"go (?), n. (Bot.) A liliaceous plant (Calochortus Nuttallii) of
Western North America, and its edible bulb; -- so called by the Ute
Indians and the Mormons.

Seg"re*gate (?), a. [L. segregatus, p. p. of segregare to separate;
pref. se-  aside + grex, gregis, a flock or herd. See Gregarious.] 1.
Separate; select.

2. (Bot.) Separated from others of the same kind.

Seg"re*gate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Segregated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Segregating.] To separate from others; to set apart.

    They are still segregated, Christians from Christians, under odious
    designations.


I. Taylor.

Seg"re*gate, v. i. (Geol.) To separate from a mass, and collect
together about centers or along lines of fracture, as in the process of
crystallization or solidification.

Seg`re*ga"tion (?), n. [L. segregatio: cf. F. ségrégation.] 1. The act
of segregating, or the state of being segregated; separation from
others; a parting.

2. (Geol.) Separation from a mass, and gathering about centers or into
cavities at hand through cohesive attraction or the crystallizing
process.

||Seiches (?), n. pl. [F.] (Geol.) Local oscillations in level observed
||in the case of some lakes, as Lake Geneva.

Seid (?), n. [Ar seyid prince.] A descendant of Mohammed through his
daughter Fatima and nephew Ali.

Seid"litz (?), a. Of or pertaining to Seidlitz, a village in Bohemia.
[Written also Sedlitz.]

Seidlitz powders, effervescing salts, consisting of two separate
powders, one of which contains forty grains of sodium bicarbonate mixed
with two drachms of Rochell&?; salt (tartrate of potassium and sodium)
and the other contains thirty-five grains of tartaric acid. The powders
are mixed in water, and drunk while effervescing, as a mild cathartic;
-- so called from the resemblance to the natural water of Seidlitz.
Called also Rochelle powders. -- Seidlitz water, a natural water from
Seidlitz, containing magnesium, sodium, calcium, and potassium
sulphates, with calcium carbonate and a little magnesium chloride. It
is used as an aperient.

Seigh (?), obs. imp. sing. of See. Saw. Chaucer.

Seign*eu"ri*al (?), a. [F., fr. seigneur. See Seignior.] 1. Of or
pertaining to the lord of a manor; manorial. Sir W. Temple.

2. Vested with large powers; independent.

Seign"ior (?), n. [OF. seignor, F. seigneur, cf. It. signore, Sp. señor
from an objective case of L. senier elder. See Senior.] 1. A lord; the
lord of a manor.

2. A title of honor or of address in the South of Europe, corresponding
to Sir or Mr. in English.

Grand Seignior, the sultan of Turkey.

Seign"ior*age (?), n. [F. seigneuriage, OF. seignorage.] 1. Something
claimed or taken by virtue of sovereign prerogative; specifically, a
charge or toll deducted from bullion brought to a mint to be coined;
the difference between the cost of a mass of bullion and the value as
money of the pieces coined from it.

    If government, however, throws the expense of coinage, as is
    reasonable, upon the holders, by making a charge to cover the
    expense (which is done by giving back rather less in coin than has
    been received in bullion, and is called "levying a seigniorage"),
    the coin will rise to the extent of the seigniorage above the value
    of the bullion.


J. S. Mill.

2. A share of the receipts of a business taken in payment for the use
of a right, as a copyright or a patent.

Seign"ior*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a seignior; seigneurial.
"Kingly or seignioral patronage." Burke.

Seign"ior*al*ty (?), n. The territory or authority of a seignior, or
lord. Milman.

Seign*io"ri*al (?), a. Same as Seigneurial.

Seign"ior*ize (?), v. t. To lord it over. [Obs.]

    As proud as he that seigniorizeth hell.


Fairfax.

Seign"ior*y (?), n.; pl. -ies (#). [OE. seignorie, OF. seigneurie, F.
seigneurie; cf. It. signoria.] 1. The power or authority of a lord;
dominion.

    O'Neal never had any seigniory over that country but what by
    encroachment he got upon the English.


Spenser.

2. The territory over which a lord holds jurisdiction; a manor.
[Written also seigneury, and seignory.]

Seine (?), n. [F. seine, or AS. segene, b&?;th fr. L. sagena, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;&?;.] (Fishing.) A large net, one edge of which is provided
with sinkers, and the other with floats. It hangs vertically in the
water, and when its ends are brought together or drawn ashore incloses
the fish.

Seine boat, a boat specially constructed to carry and pay out a seine.

Sein"er (?), n. One who fishes with a seine.

Sein"ing, n. Fishing with a seine.

Seint (?), n. [See Cincture.] A girdle. [Obs.] "Girt with a seint of
silk." Chaucer.

Seint, n. A saint. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sein"tu*a*ry (?), n. Sanctuary. [Obs.]

Seir"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Seerfish.

Sei"ro*spore (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; a cord + E. spore.] (Bot.) One of
several spores arranged in a chain as in certain algæ of the genus
Callithamnion.

Seise (?), v. t. See Seize. Spenser.

This is the common spelling in the law phrase to be seised of (an
estate).

Sei"sin (?), n. See Seizin. Spenser.

{ Seis"mic (?), Seis"mal (?), } a. [Gr. seismo`s an earthquake, from
sei`ein to shake.] Of or pertaining to an earthquake; caused by an
earthquake.

Seismic vertical, the point upon the earth's surface vertically over
the center of effort or focal point whence the earthquake's impulse
proceeds, or the vertical line connecting these two points.

Seis"mo*graph (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; an earthquake + -graph.] (Physics)
An apparatus for registering the shocks and undulatory motions of
earthquakes.

Seis`mo*graph"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to a seismograph; indicated
by a seismograph.

Seis*mog"ra*phy (?), n. 1. A writing about, or a description of,
earthquakes.

2. The art of registering the shocks and undulatory movements of
earthquakes.

Seis`mo*log"ic*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to seismology. --
Seis`mo*log"ic*al*ly, adv.

Seis*mol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; an earthquake + -logy.] The
science of earthquakes.

Seis*mom"e*ter (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; an earthquake + -meter.]
(Physics) An instrument for measuring the direction, duration, and
force of earthquakes and like concussions.

Seis`mo*met"ric (?), a. Of or pertaining to seismometry, or
seismometer; as, seismometric instruments; seismometric measurements.

Seis*mom"e*try (?), n. The mensuration of such phenomena of earthquakes
as can be expressed in numbers, or by their relation to the coördinates
of space.

Seis"mo*scope (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; an earthquake + -scope.] (Physics)
A seismometer.

Se"i*ty (?), n. [L. se one's self.] Something peculiar to one's self.
[R.] Tatler.

Seiz"a*ble (?), a. That may be seized.

Seize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seized (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Seizing.]
[OE. seisen, saisen, OF. seisir, saisir, F. saisir, of Teutonic origin,
and akin to E. set. The meaning is properly, to set, put, place, hence,
to put in possession of. See Set, v. t.] 1. To fall or rush upon
suddenly and lay hold of; to gripe or grasp suddenly; to reach and
grasp.

    For by no means the high bank he could seize.


Spenser.

    Seek you to seize and gripe into your hands The royalties and
    rights of banished Hereford?


Shak.

<! p. 1305 !>

2. To take possession of by force.

    At last they seize The scepter, and regard not David's sons.


Milton.

3. To invade suddenly; to take sudden hold of; to come upon suddenly;
as, a fever seizes a patient.

    Hope and deubt alternate seize her seul.


Pope.

4. (law) To take possession of by virtue of a warrant or other legal
authority; as, the sheriff seized the debtor's goods.

5. To fasten; to fix. [Obs.]

    As when a bear hath seized her cruel claws Upon the carcass of some
    beast too weak.


Spenser.

6. To grap with the mind; to comprehend fully and distinctly; as, to
seize an idea.

7. (Naut.) To bind or fasten together with a lashing of small stuff, as
yarn or marline; as, to seize ropes.

This word, by writers on law, is commonly written seise, in the phrase
to be seised of (an estate), as also, in composition, disseise,
disseisin.

To be seized of, to have possession, or right of possession; as, A B
was seized and possessed of the manor of Dale. "Whom age might see
seized of what youth made prize." Chapman. -- To seize on or upon, to
fall on and grasp; to take hold on; to take possession of suddenly and
forcibly.

Syn. -- To catch; grasp; clutch; snatch; apprehend; arrest; take;
capture.

Seiz"er (?), n. One who, or that which, seizes.

Sei"zin (?), n. [F. saisine. See Seize.] 1. (Law) Possession;
possession of an estate of froehold. It may be either in deed or in
law; the former when there is actual possession, the latter when there
is a right to such possession by construction of law. In some of the
United States seizin means merely ownership. Burrill.

2. The act of taking possession. [Obs.]

3. The thing possessed; property. Sir M. Halle.

Commonly spelt by writers on law seisin.

Livery of seizin. (Eng. Law) See Note under Livery, 1.

Seiz"ing (?), n. 1. The act of taking or grasping suddenly.

2. (Naut.) (a) The operation of fastening together or lashing. (b) The
cord or lashing used for such fastening.

Sei"zor (?), n. (Law) One who seizes, or takes possession.

Sei"zure (?), n. 1. The act of seizing, or the state of being seized;
sudden and violent grasp or gripe; a taking into possession; as, the
seizure of a thief, a property, a throne, etc.

2. Retention within one's grasp or power; hold; possession; ownership.

    Make o'er thy honor by a deed of trust, And give me seizure of the
    mighty wealth.


Dryden.

3. That which is seized, or taken possession of; a thing laid hold of,
or possessed.

{ Se"jant, Se"jeant } (?), a. [F. séant, p. pr. of seoir to sit, L.
sedere.] (Her.) Sitting, as a lion or other beast.

Sejant rampant, sitting with the forefeet lifted up. Wright.

Se*jein" (?), v. t. [L. sejungere; pref. se- aside + jungere to join.
See Join.] To separate. [Obs.]

Se*junc"tion (?), n. [L. sejunctio. See Sejoin.] The act of disjoining,
or the state of being disjoined. [Obs.] Bp. Pearson.

Se*jun"gi*ble (?), a. [See Sejoin.] Capable of being disjoined. [Obs.]
Bp. Pearson.

Seke (?), a. Sick. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Seke (?), v. t. & i. To seek. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||Se"kes (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a pen, a sacred inclosure, a
||shrine.] (Arch.) A place in a pagan temple in which the images of the
||deities were inclosed.

Se*la"chi*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of the Selachii. See Illustration in
Appendix.

||Se*la"chi*i (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a fish having
||cartilages instead of bones.] (Zoöl.) An order of elasmobranchs
||including the sharks and rays; the Plagiostomi. Called also Selacha,
||Selache, and Selachoidei.

||Sel`a*choi"de*i (?), n. pl. [NL. See Selachii, and -oid.] (Zoöl.)
||Same as Selachii.

||Sel`a*chos"to*mi (?), n. pl. [NL. See Selachii, and Stoma.] (Zoöl.) A
||division of ganoid fishes which includes the paddlefish, in which the
||mouth is armed with small teeth.

||Sel`a*gi*nel"la (?), n. [NL., fr. L. selago, -inis, a kind of plant.]
||(Bot.) A genus of cryptogamous plants resembling Lycopodia, but
||producing two kinds of spores; also, any plant of this genus. Many
||species are cultivated in conservatories.

Se"lah (?), n. [Heb. selh.] (Script.) A word of doubtful meaning,
occuring frequently in the Psalms; by some, supposed to signify silence
or a pause in the musical performance of the song.

    Beyond the fact that Selah is a musical term, we know absolutely
    nothing about it.


Dr. W. Smith (Bib. Dict.)

Sel"couth (sl"kth), a. [AS. selcð, seldcð; seld rare + cð known. See
Uncouth.] Rarely known; unusual; strange. [Obs.]

    [She] wondered much at his so selcouth case.


Spenser.

Seld (sld), a. [See Seldom.] Rare; uncommon; unusual. [Obs.] Chaucer.
Spenser.

Seld, adv. Rarely; seldom. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sel"den (-sen), adv. Seldom. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sel"dom (-dm), adv. [Usually, Compar. More seldom (mr"); superl. Most
seldom (mst"); but sometimes also, Seldomer (-r), Seldomest.] [AS.
seldan, seldon, seldum, fr. seld rare; akin to OFries. sielden, D.
zelden, G. selten, OHG. seltan, Icel. sjaldan, Dan. sielden, Sw.
sällan, Goth. sildaleiks marvelous.] Rarely; not often; not frequently.

    Wisdom and youth are seldom joined in one.


Hooker.

Sel"dom (?), a. Rare; infrequent. [Archaic.] "A suppressed and seldom
anger." Jer. Taylor.

Sel"dom*ness, n. Rareness. Hooker.

Seld"seen` (?), a. [AS. seldsiene.] Seldom seen. [Obs.] Drayton.

Seld"shewn` (?), a. [Seld + shown.] Rarely shown or exhibited. [Obs.]
Shak.

Se*lect" (?), a. [L. selectus, p. p. of seligere to select; pref. se-
aside + levere to gather. See Legend.] Taken from a number by
preferance; picked out as more valuable or exellent than others; of
special value or exellence; nicely chosen; selected; choice.

    A few select spirits had separated from the crowd, and formed a fit
    audience round a far greater teacher.


Macaulay.

Se*lect", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Selected; p. pr. & vb. n. Selecting.] To
choose and take from a number; to take by preference from among others;
to pick out; to cull; as, to select the best authors for perusal. "One
peculiar nation to select." Milton.

    The pious chief . . . A hundred youths from all his train selects.


Dryden.

Se*lect"ed*ly, adv. With care and selection. [R.]

Se*lec"tion (?), n. [L. selectio: cf. F. sélection.] . The act of
selecting, or the state of being selected; choice, by preference.

2. That which is selected; a collection of things chosen; as, a choice
selection of books.

Natural selection. (Biol.) See under Natural.

Se*lect"ive (?), a. Selecting; tending to select.

    This selective providence of the Almighty.


Bp. Hall.

Se*lect"man (?), n.; pl. Selectmen (&?;). One of a board of town
officers chosen annually in the New England States to transact the
general public business of the town, and have a kind of executive
authority. The number is usually from three to seven in each town.

    The system of delegated town action was then, perhaps, the same
    which was defined in an "order made in 1635 by the inhabitants of
    Charlestown at a full meeting for the government of the town, by
    selectmen;" the name presently extended throughout New England to
    municipal governors.


Palfrey.

Se*lect"ness, n. The quality or state of being select.

Se*lect"or (?), n. [L.] One who selects.

Sel"e*nate (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of selenic acid; -- formerly called
also seleniate.

Sel`en*hy"dric (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or designating,
hydrogen selenide, H2Se, regarded as an acid analogous to sulphydric
acid.

Se*len"ic (?), a. [Cf. F. sélénique.] (Chem.) Of or pertaining to
selenium; derived from, or containing, selenium; specifically,
designating those compounds in which the element has a higher valence
as contrasted with selenious compounds.

Sel"e*nide (?), n. (Chem.) A binary compound of selenium, or a compound
regarded as binary; as, ethyl selenide.

Sel`e*nif"er*ous (?), a. [Selenium + -ferous. ] Containing, or
impregnated with, selenium; as, seleniferous pyrites.

Se*le"ni*o- (&?;). (Chem.) A combining form (also used adjectively)
denoting the presence of selenium or its compounds; as,
selenio-phosphate, a phosphate having selenium in place of all, or a
part, of the oxygen.

Se*le"ni*ous (?), a. [Cf. F. sélénieux.] (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or
containing, selenium; specifically, designating those compounds in
which the element has a lower valence as contrasted with selenic
compounds.

Sel"e*nite (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of selenious acid.

Sel"e*nite, n. [L. selenites, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; (sc. &?;&?;&?;), from
selh`nh the moon. So called from a fancied resemblance in luster or
appearance to the moon.] (Min.) A variety of gypsum, occuring in
transparent crystals or crystalline masses.

{ Sel`e*nit"ic (?), Sel`e*nit"ic*al (?), } a. (Min.) Of or pertaining
to selenite; resembling or containing selenite.

Se*le"ni*um (?), n. [NL., from Gr. selh`nh the moon. So called because
of its chemical analogy to tellurium (from L. tellus the earth), being,
as it were, a companion to it.] (Chem.) A nonmetallic element of the
sulphur group, and analogous to sulphur in its compounds. It is found
in small quantities with sulphur and some sulphur ores, and obtained in
the free state as a dark reddish powder or crystalline mass, or as a
dark metallic-looking substance. It exhibits under the action of light
a remarkable variation in electric conductivity, and is used in certain
electric apparatus. Symbol Se. Atomic weight 78.9.

Sel`e*ni"u*ret (?), n. (Chem.) A selenide. [Obs.]

Sel`e*ni"u*ret`ed (?), a. (Chem.) Combined with selenium as in a
selenide; as, seleniureted hydrogen. [Written also seleniuretted.]
[Obsoles.]

Se*le`no*cen"tric (?), a. [Gr. selh`nh the moon + E. centric.]
(Astron.) As seen or estimated from the center of the moon; with the
moon central.

Se*le"no*graph (?), n. A picture or delineation of the moon's surface,
or of any part of it.

Sel`e*nog"ra*pher (?), n. One skilled in selenography. Wright.

{ Sel`e*no*graph"ic (?), Sel`e*no*graph"i*cal (?), } a. [Cf. F.
sélénographique.] Of or pertaining to selenography.

Sel`e*nog"ra*phist (?), n. A selenographer.

Sel`e*nog"ra*phy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; the moon + -graphy.] The
science that treats of the physical features of the moon; --
corresponding to physical geography in respect to the earth. "Accurate
selenography, or description of the moon." Sir T. Browne.

Sel`e*nol"o*gy, n. [Gr. selh`nh the moon + -logy.] That branch of
astronomy which treats of the moon. -- Sel`e*no*log"i*cal (#), a.

Sel`e*no"ni*um (?), n. [Selenium + sulphonium.] (Chem.) A hypothetical
radical of selenium, analogous to sulphonium. [R.]

Self (slf), a. [AS. self, seolf, sylf; akin to OS. self, OFries. self,
D. zelf, G. selb, selber, selbst, Dan. selv. Sw. sjelf, Icel. sjlfr,
Goth. silba. Cf. Selvage.] Same; particular; very; identical. [Obs.,
except in the compound selfsame.] "On these self hills." Sir. W.
Raleigh.

    To shoot another arrow that self way Which you did shoot the first.


Shak.

    At that self moment enters Palamon.


Dryden.

Self, n.; pl. Selves (&?;). 1. The individual as the object of his own
reflective consciousness; the man viewed by his own cognition as the
subject of all his mental phenomena, the agent in his own activities,
the subject of his own feelings, and the possessor of capacities and
character; a person as a distinct individual; a being regarded as
having personality. "Those who liked their real selves." Addison.

    A man's self may be the worst fellow to converse with in the world.


Pope.

    The self, the I, is recognized in every act of intelligence as the
    subject to which that act belongs. It is I that perceive, I that
    imagine, I that remember, I that attend, I that compare, I that
    feel, I that will, I that am conscious.


Sir W. Hamilton.

2. Hence, personal interest, or love of private interest; selfishness;
as, self is his whole aim.

3. Personification; embodiment. [Poetic.]

    She was beauty's self.


Thomson.

Self is united to certain personal pronouns and pronominal adjectives
to express emphasis or distinction. Thus, for emphasis; I myself will
write; I will examine for myself; thou thyself shalt go; thou shalt see
for thyself; you yourself shall write; you shall see for yourself; he
himself shall write; he shall examine for himself; she herself shall
write; she shall examine for herself; the child itself shall be
carried; it shall be present itself. It is also used reflexively; as, I
abhor myself; thou enrichest thyself; he loves himself; she admires
herself; it pleases itself; we walue ourselves; ye hurry yourselves;
they see themselves. Himself, herself, themselves, are used in the
nominative case, as well as in the objective. "Jesus himself baptized
not, but his disciples." John iv. 2.

self is used in the formation of innumerable compounds, usually of
obvious signification, in most of which it denotes either the agent or
the object of the action expressed by the word with which it is joined,
or the person in behalf of whom it is performed, or the person or thing
to, for, or towards whom or which a quality, attribute, or feeling
expressed by the following word belongs, is directed, or is exerted, or
from which it proceeds; or it denotes the subject of, or object
affected by, such action, quality, attribute, feeling, or the like; as,
self-abandoning, self-abnegation, self-abhorring, self-absorbed,
self-accusing, self-adjusting, self-balanced, self-boasting,
self-canceled, self-combating, self-commendation, self-condemned,
self-conflict, self-conquest, self-constituted, self-consumed,
self-contempt, self-controlled, self-deceiving, self-denying,
self-destroyed, self-disclosure, self-display, self-dominion,
self-doomed, self-elected, self-evolved, self-exalting, self-excusing,
self-exile, self-fed, self- fulfillment, self-governed, self-harming,
self- helpless, self-humiliation, self-idolized, self- inflicted,
self-improvement, self-instruction, self-invited, self-judging,
self-justification, self-loathing, self-loving, self-maintenance,
self-mastered, self-nourishment, self-perfect, self-perpetuation,
self-pleasing, self-praising, self-preserving, self-questioned,
self-relying, self-restraining, self-revelation, self-ruined,
self-satisfaction, self-support, self-sustained, self-sustaining,
self-tormenting, self-troubling, self-trust, self-tuition,
self-upbraiding, self-valuing, self-worshiping, and many others.

Self`-a*based" (?), a. Humbled by consciousness of inferiority,
unworthiness, guilt, or shame.

Self`-a*base"ment (?), n. 1. Degradation of one's self by one's own
act.

2. Humiliation or abasement proceeding from consciousness of
inferiority, guilt, or shame.

Self`-a*bas"ing, a. Lowering or humbling one's self.

Self`-ab*hor"rence (?), n. Abhorrence of one's self.

Self`-ab`ne*ga"tion (?), n. Self- denial; self-renunciation;
self-sacrifice.

Self`-abuse" (?), n. 1. The abuse of one's own self, powers, or
faculties.

2. Self-deception; delusion. [Obs.] Shak.

3. Masturbation; onanism; self- pollution.

Self"-ac*cused" (?), a. Accused by one's self or by one's conscience.
"Die self-accused." Cowper.

Self`-act"ing (?), a. Acting of or by one's self or by itself; -- said
especially of a machine or mechanism which is made to perform of or for
itself what is usually done by human agency; automatic; as, a
self-acting feed apparatus; a self-acting mule; a self-acting press.

Self`-ac"tion (?), n. Action by, or originating in, one's self or
itself.

Self`-ac"tive (?), a. Acting of one's self or of itself; acting without
depending on other agents.

Self`-ac*tiv"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being self-active;
self-action.

Self`-ad*just"ing (?), a. (Mach.) Capable of assuming a desired
position or condition with relation to other parts, under varying
circumstances, without requiring to be adjusted by hand; -- said of a
piece in machinery.

Self-adjusting bearing (Shafting), a bearing which is supported in such
a manner that it may tip to accomodate flexure or displacement of the
shaft.

Self`-ad`mi*ra"tion (?), n. Admiration of one's self.

Self`-af*fairs" (?), n. pl. One's own affairs; one's private business.
[Obs.] Shak.

<! p. 1306 !>

Self`-af*fright"ed (?), a. Frightened at or by one's self. Shak.

Self`-ag*gran"dize*ment (?), n. The aggrandizement of one's self.

Self`-an*ni"hi*la`ted (?), a. Annihilated by one's self.

Self`-an*ni`hi*la"tion (?), n. Annihilation by one's own acts;
annihilation of one's desires. Addison.

Self`-ap*plause" (?), n. Applause of one's self.

Self`-ap*ply"ing (?), a. Applying to or by one's self.

Self`-ap*prov"ing (?), a. Approving one's own action or character by
one's own judgment.

    One self-approving hour whole years outweighs Of stupid starers and
    of loud huzzas.


Pope.

Self`-as*sert"ing (?), a. Asserting one's self, or one's own rights or
claims; hence, putting one's self forward in a confident or assuming
manner.

Self`-as*ser"tion (?), n. The act of asserting one's self, or one's own
rights or claims; the quality of being self-asserting.

Self`-as*sert"ive (?), a. Disposed to self-assertion; self-asserting.

Self`-as*sumed` (?), a. Assumed by one's own act, or without authority.

Self`-as*sured` (?), a. Assured by or of one's self; self-reliant;
complacent.

Self`-ban"ished (?), a. Exiled voluntarily.

Self"-be*got"ten (?), a. Begotten by one's self, or one's own powers.

Self"-born` (?), a. Born or produced by one's self.

{ Self`-cen"tered, Self`-cen"tred } (?), a. Centered in itself, or in
one's self.

    There hangs the ball of earth and water mixt, Self-centered and
    unmoved.


Dryden.

{ Self`-cen"ter*ing (?), Self`-cen"tring (?) } a. Centering in one's
self.

Self`-cen*tra"tion (?), n. The quality or state of being self-centered.

Self`-char"i*ty (?), n. Self- love. [Obs.] Shak.

Self"-col`or (?), n. A color not mixed or variegated.

Self`-col"ored (?), a. Being of a single color; -- applied to flowers,
animals, and textile fabrics.

Self`-com*mand" (?), n. Control over one's own feelings, temper, etc.;
self-control.

Self`-com*mune" (?), n. Self- communion. [R.]

Self`-com*mu"ni*ca*tive (?), a. Imparting or communicating by its own
powers.

Self`-com*mun"ion (?), n. Communion with one's self; thoughts about
one's self.

Self`-com*pla"cen*cy (?), n. The quality of being self-complacent. J.
Foster.

Self`-com*pla"cent (?), a. Satisfied with one's own character,
capacity, and doings; self- satisfied.

Self`-con*ceit" (?), n. Conceit of one's self; an overweening opinion
of one's powers or endowments.

Syn. -- See Egotism.

Self`-con*ceit"ed, a. Having an overweening opinion of one's own
powers, attainments; vain; conceited. -- Self`-con*ceit"ed*ness, n.

Self`-con*cern" (?), n. Concern for one's self.

Self`-con`dem*na"tion (?), n. Condemnation of one's self by one's own
judgment.

Self`-con"fi*dence (?), n. The quality or state of being
self-confident; self-reliance.

    A feeling of self-confidence which supported and sustained him.


Beaconsfield.

Self`-con"fi*dent (?), a. Confident of one's own strength or powers;
relying on one's judgment or ability; self-reliant. --
Self`-con"fi*dent*ly, adv.

Self`-con"ju*gate (?), a. (Geom.) Having the two things that are
conjugate parts of the same figure; as, self-conjugate triangles.

Self`-con"scious (?), a. 1. Conscious of one's acts or state as
belonging to, or originating in, one's self. "My self-conscious worth."
Dryden.

2. Conscious of one's self as an object of the observation of others;
as, the speaker was too self- conscious.

Self`-con"scious*ness, n. The quality or state of being self-conscious.

Self`-con*sid"er*ing (?), a. Considering in one's own mind;
deliberating. Pope.

Self`-con*sist"en*cy (?), n. The quality or state of being
self-consistent.

Self`-con*sist"ent (?), a. Consistent with one's self or with itself;
not deviation from the ordinary standard by which the conduct is
guided; logically consistent throughout; having each part consistent
with the rest.

Self`-con*sum"ing (?), a. Consuming one's self or itself.

Self`-con*tained" (?), a. 1. Having self-control; reserved;
uncommunicative; wholly engrossed in one's self.

2. (Mach.) Having all the essential working parts connected by a
bedplate or framework, or contained in a case, etc., so that mutual
relations of the parts do not depend upon fastening outside of the
machine itself.

Self-contained steam engine. (a) A steam engine having both bearings
for the crank shaft attached to the frame of the engine. (b) A steam
engine and boiler combined and fastened together; a portable steam
engine.

Self`-con`tra*dic"tion (?), n. The act of contradicting one's self or
itself; repugnancy in conceptions or in terms; a proposition consisting
of two members, one of which contradicts the other; as, to be and not
to be at the same time is a self-contradiction.

Self`-con`tra*dict"o*ry (?), a. Contradicting one's self or itself.

Self`-con*trol" (?), n. Control of one's self; restraint exercised over
one's self; self- command.

Self`-con*vict"ed (?), a. Convicted by one's own consciousness,
knowledge, avowal, or acts.

Self`-con*vic"tion (?), n. The act of convicting one's self, or the
state of being self- convicted.

Self`-cre*at"ed (?), a. Created by one's self; not formed or
constituted by another.

Self`-cul"ture (?), n. Culture, training, or education of one's self by
one's own efforts.

Self`-de*ceit" (?), n. The act of deceiving one's self, or the state of
being self-deceived; self- deception.

Self`-de*ceived" (?), a. Deceived or misled respecting one's self by
one's own mistake or error.

Self`-de*cep"tion (?), n. Self- deceit.

Self`-de*fence" (?), n. See Self-defense.

Self`-de*fense" (?), n. The act of defending one's own person,
property, or reputation.

In self-defense (Law), in protection of self, -- it being permitted in
law to a party on whom a grave wrong is attempted to resist the wrong,
even at the peril of the life of the assailiant. Wharton.

Self`-de*fen"sive (?), a. Defending, or tending to defend, one's own
person, property, or reputation.

Self`-deg`ra*da"tion (?), n. The act of degrading one's self, or the
state of being so degraded.

Self`-de*la"tion (?), n. Accusation of one's self. [R.] Milman.

Self`-de*lu"sion (?), n. The act of deluding one's self, or the state
of being thus deluded.

Self`-de*ni"al (?), n. The denial of one's self; forbearing to gratify
one's own desires; self- sacrifice.

Self`-de*ny"ing (?), a. Refusing to gratify one's self;
self-sacrificing. -- Self`- de*ny"ing*ly, adv.

Self`-de*pend"ent (?), a. Dependent on one's self; self-depending;
self-reliant.

Self`-de*pend"ing, a. Depending on one's self.

Self`-de*praved" (?), a. Corrupted or depraved by one's self. Milton.

Self`-de*stroy"er (?), n. One who destroys himself; a suicide.

Self`-de*struc"tion (?), n. The destruction of one's self; self-murder;
suicide. Milton.

Self`-de*struc"tive (?), a. Destroying, or tending to destroy, one's
self or itself; rucidal.

Self`-de*ter`mi*na"tion (?), n. Determination by one's self; or,
determination of one's acts or states without the necessitating force
of motives; -- applied to the voluntary or activity.

Self`-de*ter"min*ing (?), a. Capable of self-determination; as, the
self-determining power of will.

Self`-de*vised" (?), a. Devised by one's self.

Self`-de*vot"ed (?), a. Devoted in person, or by one's own will.
Hawthorne.

Self`-de*vote"ment (?), n. Self- devotion. [R.]

Self`-de*vo"tion (?), n. The act of devoting one's self, or the state
of being self-devoted; willingness to sacrifice one's own advantage or
happiness for the sake of others; self-sacrifice.

Self`-de*vour"ing (?), a. Devouring one's self or itself. Danham.

Self`-dif*fu"sive (?), a. Having power to diffuse itself; diffusing
itself. Norris.

Self`-dis"ci*pline (?), n. Correction or government of one's self for
the sake of improvement.

Self`-dis*trust" (?), n. Want of confidence in one' self; diffidence.

Self`-ed"u*ca`ted (?), a. Educated by one's own efforts, without
instruction, or without pecuniary assistance from others.

Self`-e*lect"ive (?), a. Having the right of electing one's self, or,
as a body, of electing its own members.

Self`-en*joy"ment, (?) n. Enjoyment of one's self; self-satisfaction.

Self`-es*teem" (?), n. The holding a good opinion of one's self;
self-complacency.

Self`-es`ti*ma"tion (?), n. The act of estimating one's self;
self-esteem.

Self`-ev"i*dence (?), n. The quality or state of being self-evident.
Locke.

Self`-ev"i*dent (?), a. Evident without proof or reasoning; producing
certainty or conviction upon a bare presentation to the mind; as, a
self-evident proposition or truth. -- Self`-ev"i*dent*ly, adv.

Self`-ev`o*lu"tion (?), n. Evolution of one's self; development by
inherent quality or power.

Self`-ex`al*ta"tion (?), n. The act of exalting one's self, or the
state of being so exalted.

Self`-ex*am"i*nant (?), n. One who examines himself; one given to
self-examination.

    The humiliated self-examinant feels that there is evil in our
    nature as well as good.


Coleridge.

Self`-ex*am`i*na"tion (?), n. An examination into one's own state,
conduct, and motives, particularly in regard to religious feelings and
duties.

Self`-ex*ist"ence (?), n. Inherent existence; existence possessed by
virtue of a being's own nature, and independent of any other being or
cause; -- an attribute peculiar to God. Blackmore.

Self`-ex*ist"ent (?), a. Existing of or by himself, independent of any
other being or cause; -- as, God is the only self-existent being.

self`-ex*plain"ing (?), a. Explaining itself; capable of being
understood without explanation.

Self`-ex*po"sure (?), n. The act of exposing one's self; the state of
being so exposed.

Self`-fer`ti*li*za"tion (?), n. (Bot.) The fertilization of a flower by
pollen from the same flower and without outer aid; autogamy.

Self`-fer"ti*lized (?), a. (Bot.) Fertilized by pollen from the same
flower.

Self`-glo"ri*ous (?), a. Springing from vainglory or vanity; vain;
boastful. Dryden.

Self`-gov"ern*ment (?), n. 1. The act of governing one's self, or the
state of being governed by one's self; self-control; self-command.

2. Hence, government of a community, state, or nation by the joint
action of the mass of people constituting such a civil body; also, the
state of being so governed; democratic government; democracy.

    It is to self-government, the great principle of popular
    representation and administration, -- the system that lets in all
    to participate in the councels that are to assign the good or evil
    to all, -- that we may owe what we are and what we hope to be.


D. Webster.

Self`-grat`u*la"tion (?), n. Gratulation of one's self.

Self`-heal" (?), n. (Bot.) A blue-flowered labiate plant (Brunella
vulgaris); the healall.

Self`-heal"ing (?), a. Having the power or property of healing itself.

Self`-help" (?), n. The act of aiding one's self, without depending on
the aid of others.

Self`-hom"i*cide (?), n. The act of killing one's self; suicide.
Hakewill.

Self"hood (?), n. Existence as a separate self, or independent person;
conscious personality; individuality. Bib. Sacra.

Self`-ig"no*rance (?), n. Ignorance of one's own character, powers, and
limitations.

Self`-ig"no*rant (?), a. Ignorant of one's self.

Self`-im*part"ing (?), a. Imparting by one's own, or by its own, powers
and will. Norris.

Self`-im*por"tance (?), n. An exaggerated estimate of one's own
importance or merit, esp. as manifested by the conduct or manners;
self-conceit.

Self`-im*por"tant (?), a. Having or manifesting an exaggerated idea of
one's own importance or merit.

Self`-im*posed" (?), a. Voluntarily taken on one's self; as,
self-imposed tasks.

Self`-im*pos"ture (?), n. Imposture practiced on one's self;
self-deceit. South.

Self`-in`dig*na"tion (?), n. Indignation at one's own character or
actions. Baxter.

Self`-in*dul"gence (?), n. Indulgence of one's appetites, desires, or
inclinations; -- the opposite of self-restraint, and self-denial.

Self`-in*dul"gent (?), a. Indulging one's appetites, desires, etc.,
freely.

Self`-in"ter*est (?), n. Private interest; the interest or advantage of
one's self.

Self`-in"ter*est*ed, a. Particularly concerned for one's own interest
or happiness.

Self`-in`vo*lu"tion (?), n. Involution in one's self; hence,
abstraction of thought; reverie.

Self"ish (?), a. 1. Caring supremely or unduly for one's self;
regarding one's own comfort, advantage, etc., in disregard, or at the
expense, of those of others.

    They judge of things according to their own private appetites and
    selfish passions.


Cudworth.

    In that throng of selfish hearts untrue.


Keble.

2. (Ethics) Believing or teaching that the chief motives of human
action are derived from love of self.

    Hobbes and the selfish school of philosophers.


Fleming.

Self"ish*ly, adv. In a selfish manner; with regard to private interest
only or chiefly.

Self"ish*ness, n. The quality or state of being selfish; exclusive
regard to one's own interest or happiness; that supreme self-love or
self-preference which leads a person to direct his purposes to the
advancement of his own interest, power, or happiness, without regarding
those of others.

    Selfishness, -- a vice utterly at variance with the happiness of
    him who harbors it, and, as such, condemned by self- love.


Sir J. Mackintosh.

Syn. -- See Self-love.

Self"ism (?), n. Concentration of one's interests on one's self;
self-love; selfishness. Emerson.

Self"ist, n. A selfish person. [R.] I. Taylor.

Self`-jus"ti*fi`er (?), n. One who excuses or justifies himself. J. M.
Mason.

Self`-kin"dled (?), a. Kindled of itself, or without extraneous aid or
power. Dryden.

Self`-know"ing (?), a. 1. Knowing one's self, or one's own character,
powers, and limitations.

2. Knowing of itself, without help from another.

Self`-knowl"edge (?), n. Knowledge of one's self, or of one's own
character, powers, limitations, etc.

Self"less, a. Having no regard to self; unselfish.

    Lo now, what hearts have men! they never mount As high as woman in
    her selfless mood.


Tennyson.

Self"less*ness, n. Quality or state of being selfless.

Self"-life` (?), n. Life for one's self; living solely or chiefly for
one's own pleasure or good.

Self`-love` (?), n. The love of one's self; desire of personal
happiness; tendency to seek one's own benefit or advantage. Shak.

    Self-love, the spring of motion, acts the soul.


Pope.

Syn. -- Selfishness. -- Self-love, Selfishness. The term self-love is
used in a twofold sense: 1. It denotes that longing for good or for
well- being which actuates the breasts of all, entering into and
characterizing every special desire. In this sense it has no moral
quality, being, from the nature of the case, neither good nor evil. 2.
It is applied to a voluntary regard for the gratification of special
desires. In this sense it is morally good or bad according as these
desires are conformed to duty or opposed to it. Selfishness is always
voluntary and always wrong, being that regard to our own interests,
gratification, etc., which is sought or indulged at the expense, and to
the injury, of others. "So long as self-love does not degenerate into
selfishness, it is quite compatible with true benevolence." Fleming.
"Not only is the phrase self-love used as synonymous with the desire of
happiness, but it is often confounded with the word selfishness, which
certainly, in strict propriety, denotes a very different disposition of
mind." Slewart.

Self`-lu"mi*nous (?), a. Possessing in itself the property of emitting
light. Sir D. Brewster.

<! p. 1307 !>

Self"-made` (?), a. Made by one's self.

Self-made man, a man who has risen from poverty or obscurity by means
of his own talents or energies.

Self"-met`tle (?), n. Inborn mettle or courage; one's own temper.
[Obs.] Shak.

Self`-mo"tion (?), n. Motion given by inherent power, without external
impulse; spontaneous or voluntary motion.

    Matter is not induced with self- motion.


Cheyne.

Self`-moved" (?), a. Moved by inherent power., without the aid of
external impulse.

Self`-mov"ing (?), a. Moving by inherent power, without the aid of
external impulse.

Self`-mur"der (?), a. Suicide.

Self`-mur"der*er (?), n. A suicide.

Self`-neg*lect"ing (?), n. A neglecting of one's self, or of one's own
interests.

    Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin As self-neglecting.


Shak.

Self"ness, n. Selfishness. [Obs.] Sir. P. Sidney.

Self`-one" (?), a. Secret. [Obs.] Marston.

Self`-o*pin"ion (?), n. Opinion, especially high opinion, of one's
self; an overweening estimate of one's self or of one's own opinion.
Collier.

Self`-o*pin"ioned (?), a. Having a high opinion of one's self;
opinionated; conceited. South.

Self`-o*rig"i*na`ting (?), a. Beginning with, or springing from, one's
self.

Self`-par`ti*al"i*ty (?), n. That partiality to himself by which a man
overrates his own worth when compared with others. Kames.

Self`-per*plexed" (?), a. Perplexed by doubts originating in one's own
mind.

Self`-pos"it*ed (?), a. Disposed or arranged by an action originating
in one's self or in itself.

    These molecular blocks of salt are self- posited.


Tyndall.

Self`-pos"it*ing, a. The act of disposing or arranging one's self or
itself.

    The self-positing of the molecules.


R. Watts.

Self"-pos*sessed" (?), a. Composed or tranquil in mind, manner, etc.;
undisturbed.

Self`-pos*ses"sion (?), n. The possession of one's powers; calmness;
self-command; presence of mind; composure.

Self"-praise` (?), n. Praise of one's self.

Self`-pres`er*va"tion (?), n. The preservation of one's self from
destruction or injury.

Self`-prop"a*ga`ting (?), a. Propagating by one's self or by itself.

Self`-reg"is*ter*ing (?), a. Registering itself; -- said of any
instrument so contrived as to record its own indications of phenomena,
whether continuously or at stated times, as at the maxima and minima of
variations; as, a self-registering anemometer or barometer.

Self`-reg"u*la`ted (?), a. Regulated by one's self or by itself.

Self`-reg"u*la*tive (?), a. Tending or serving to regulate one's self
or itself. Whewell.

Self`-re*li"ance (?), n. Reliance on one's own powers or judgment;
self-trust.

Self`-re*li"ant (?), a. Reliant upon one's self; trusting to one's own
powers or judgment.

Self`-re*nun`ci*a"tion (?), n. The act of renouncing, or setting aside,
one's own wishes, claims, etc.; self-sacrifice.

Self`-re*pel"len*cy (?), n. The quality or state of being
self-repelling.

Self`-re*pel"ling, (&?;) a. Made up of parts, as molecules or atoms,
which mutually repel each other; as, gases are self-repelling.

Self`-rep`e*ti"tion (?), n. Repetition of one's self or of one's acts;
the saying or doing what one has already said or done.

Self`-re*proach" (?), n. The act of reproaching one's self; censure by
one's own conscience.

Self`-re*proached" (?), a. Reproached by one's own conscience or
judgment.

Self`-re*proach"ing (?), a. Reproaching one's self. --
Self`-re*proach"ing*ly, adv.

Self`-re*proof" (?), n. The act of reproving one's self; censure of
one's conduct by one's own judgment.

Self`-re*proved" (?), a. Reproved by one's own conscience or one's own
sense of guilt.

Self`-re*prov"ing (?), a. Reproving one's self; reproving by
consciousness of guilt.

Self`-re*prov"ing*ly, adv. In a self-reproving way.

Self`-re*pug"nant (?), a. Self- contradictory; inconsistent. Brougham.

Self`-re*pul"sive (?), a. Self- repelling.

Self`-re*spect" (?), n. Respect for one's self; regard for one's
character; laudable self- esteem.

Self`-re*strained" (?), a. Restrained by one's self or itself;
restrained by one's own power or will.

Self`-re*straint" (?), n. Restraint over one's self; self-control;
self-command.

Self`-rev"er*ence (?), n. A reverent respect for one's self. Tennyson.

Self`-right"eous (?), a. Righteous in one's own esteem; pharisaic.

Self`-right"eous*ness, n. The quality or state of being self-righteous;
pharisaism.

Self`-sac"ri*fice (?), n. The act of sacrificing one's self, or one's
interest, for others; self- devotion.

Self`-sac"ri*fi`cing (?), a. Yielding up one's own interest, feelings,
etc; sacrificing one's self.

Self"same (?), a. [Self, a. + same.] Precisely the same; the very same;
identical.

    His servant was healed in the selfsame hour.


Matt. viii. 13.

Self`-sat`is*fac"tion (?), n. The quality or state of being
self-satisfied.

Self`-sat"is*fied (?), a. Satisfied with one's self or one's actions;
self-complacent.

Self`-sat"is*fy`ing (?), a. Giving satisfaction to one's self.

Self"-seek`er, n. One who seeks only his own interest, advantage, or
pleasure.

Self"-seek`ing, a. Seeking one's own interest or happiness; selfish.
Arbuthnot.

Self"-seek`ing, n. The act or habit of seeking one's own interest or
happiness; selfishness.

Self`-slaugh"ter (?), n. Suicide. Shak.

Self`-suf*fi"cien*cy (?), n. The quality or state of being
self-sufficient.

Self`-suf*fi"cient (?), a. 1. Sufficient for one's self without
external aid or coöperation.

    Neglect of friends can never be proved rational till we prove the
    person using it omnipotent and self-sufficient, and such as can
    never need any mortal assistance.


South.

2. Having an overweening confidence in one's own abilities or worth;
hence, haughty; overbearing. "A rash and self-sufficient manner." I.
Watts.

Self`-suf*fi"cing (?), a. Sufficing for one's self or for itself,
without needing external aid; self- sufficient. --
Self`-suf*fi"cing*ness, n. J. C. Shairp.

Self`-sus*pend"ed (?), a. Suspended by one's self or by itself;
balanced. Southey.

Self`-sus*pi"cious (?), a. Suspicious or distrustful of one's self.
Baxter.

Self"-taught` (?), a. Taught by one's own efforts.

Self`-tor*ment"or (?), n. One who torments himself.

Self`-tor"ture (?), n. The act of inflicting pain on one's self; pain
inflicted on one's self.

Self"-trust`, n. Faith in one's self; self-reliance.

Self`-uned" (?), a. [E. self + L. unus one.] One with itself; separate
from others. [Obs.] Sylvester.

Self"-view` (?), n. A view of one's self; specifically, carefulness or
regard for one's own interests.

Self`-will" (?), n. [AS. selfwill.] One's own will, esp. when opposed
to that of others; obstinacy.

Self`-willed" (?), a. Governed by one's own will; not yielding to the
wishes of others; obstinate.

Self`-willed"ness, n. Obstinacy. Sir W. Scott.

Self"-wor`ship (?), n. The idolizing of one's self; immoderate
self-conceit.

Self"-wrong` (?), n. Wrong done by a person himself. Shak.

Sel"ion (?), n. [OF. seillon a measure of land, F. sillon a ridge,
furrow, LL. selio a measure of land.] A short piece of land in arable
ridges and furrows, of uncertain quantity; also, a ridge of land lying
between two furrows. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Sel*juk"i*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Seljuk, a Tartar chief who
embraced Mohammedanism, and began the subjection of Western Asia to
that faith and rule; of or pertaining to the dynasty founded by him, or
the empire maintained by his descendants from the 10th to the 13th
century. J. H. Newman.

Sel*juk"i*an, n. A member of the family of Seljuk; an adherent of that
family, or subject of its government; (pl.) the dynasty of Turkish
sultans sprung from Seljuk.

Sell (sl), n. Self. [Obs. or Scot.] B. Jonson.

Sell, n. A sill. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sell, n. A cell; a house. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sell, n. [F. selle, L. sella, akin to sedere to sit. See Sit.] 1. A
saddle for a horse. [Obs.]

    He left his lofty steed with golden self.


Spenser.

2. A throne or lofty seat. [Obs.] Fairfax.

Sell, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sold (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Selling.] [OE.
sellen, sillen, AS. sellan, syllan, to give, to deliver; akin to OS.
sellian, OFries. sella, OHG. sellen, Icel. selja to hand over, to sell,
Sw. sälja to sell, Dan. s&?;lge, Goth. saljan to offer a sacrifice; all
from a noun akin to E. sale. Cf. Sale.] 1. To transfer to another for
an equivalent; to give up for a valuable consideration; to dispose of
in return for something, especially for money.

    If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to
    the poor.


Matt. xix. 21.

    I am changed; I'll go sell all my land.


Shak.

Sell is corellative to buy, as one party buys what the other sells. It
is distinguished usually from exchange or barter, in which one
commodity is given for another; whereas in selling the consideration is
usually money, or its representative in current notes.

2. To make a matter of bargain and sale of; to accept a price or reward
for, as for a breach of duty, trust, or the like; to betray.

    You would have sold your king to slaughter.


Shak.

3. To impose upon; to trick; to deceive; to make a fool of; to cheat.
[Slang] Dickens.

To sell one's life dearly, to cause much loss to those who take one's
life, as by killing a number of one's assailants. -- To sell (anything)
out, to dispose of it wholly or entirely; as, he had sold out his corn,
or his interest in a business.

Sell, v. i. 1. To practice selling commodities.

    I will buy with you, sell with you; . . . but I will not eat with
    you.


Shak.

2. To be sold; as, corn sells at a good price.

To sell out, to sell one's whole stockk in trade or one's entire
interest in a property or a business.

Sell, n. An imposition; a cheat; a hoax. [Colloq.]

{ Sel"lan*ders (?), Sel"len*ders (?), } n. pl. (Far.) See Sallenders.

Sell"er (?), n. One who sells. Chaucer.

Sel"ters wa"ter (?). A mineral water from Sellers, in the district of
Nassan, Germany, containing much free carbonic acid.

Selt"zer wa"ter (?). See Selters water.

Selt"zo-gene (?), n. [Seltzer water + the root of Gr. &?;&?;&?; to be
born.] A gazogene.

{ Sel"vage, Sel"vedge } (?), n. [Self + edge, i. e., its own proper
edge; cf. OD. selfegge.] 1. The edge of cloth which is woven in such a
manner as to prevent raveling.

2. The edge plate of a lock, through which the bolt passes. Knight.

3. (Mining.) A layer of clay or decomposed rock along the wall of a
vein. See Gouge, n., 4. Raymond.

{ Sel"vaged, Sel"vedged } (?), a. Having a selvage.

Sel`va*gee" (?), n. (Naut.) A skein or hank of rope yarns wound round
with yarns or marline, -- used for stoppers, straps, etc.

Selve (?), a. Self; same. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Selves (?), n., pl. of Self.

Se"ly (?), a. Silly. [Obs.] Chaucer. Wyclif.

||Se*mæ`o*stom"a*ta (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a military
||standard + &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;, mouth.] (Zoöl.) A division of
||Discophora having large free mouth lobes. It includes Aurelia, and
||Pelagia. Called also Semeostoma. See Illustr. under Discophora, and
||Medusa.

Sem"a*phore (?), n. [Gr. sh^ma a sign + fe`rein to bear: cf. F.
sémaphore.] A signal telegraph; an apparatus for giving signals by the
disposition of lanterns, flags, oscillating arms, etc.

{ Sem`a*phor"ic (?), Sem`a*phor"ic*al (?) } a. [Cf. F. sémaphorique.]
Of or pertaining to a semaphore, or semaphores; telegraphic.

Sem`a*phor"ic*al*ly, adv. By means of a semaphore.

Se*maph"o*rist (?), n. One who manages or operates a semaphore.

Sem`a*tol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. sh^ma, sh`matos, sign + -logy.] The
doctrine of signs as the expression of thought or reasoning; the
science of indicating thought by signs. Smart.

Sem"a*trope (?), n. [Gr. sh^ma sign + tre`pein to turn. ] An instrument
for signaling by reflecting the rays of the sun in different
directions. Knight.

Sem"bla*ble (?), a. [F., from sembler to seem, resemble, L. similare,
simulare. See Simulate.] Like; similar; resembling. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sem"bla*ble, n. Likeness; representation. [Obs.]

Sem"bla*bly, adv. In like manner. [Obs.] Shak.

Sem"blance (?), n. [F. See Semblable, a.] 1. Seeming; appearance; show;
figure; form.

    Thier semblance kind, and mild their gestures were.


Fairfax.

2. Likeness; resemblance, actual or apparent; similitude; as, the
semblance of worth; semblance of virtue.

    Only semblances or imitations of shells.


Woodward.

Sem"blant (?), a. [F. semblant, p. pr.] 1. Like; resembling. [Obs.]
Prior.

2. Seeming, rather than real; apparent. [R.] Carlyle.

Sem"blant, n. [F.] 1. Show; appearance; figure; semblance. [Obs.]
Spenser.

    His flatterers made semblant of weeping.


Chaucer.

2. The face. [Obs.] Wyclif (Luke xxiv. 5).

Sem"bla*tive (?), a. Resembling. [Obs.]

    And all is semblative a woman's part.


Shak.

Sem"ble (?), v. i. [F. sembler. See Semblable, a.] 1. To imitate; to
make a representation or likeness. [Obs.]

    Where sembling art may carve the fair effect.


Prior.

2. (Law) It seems; -- chiefly used impersonally in reports and
judgments to express an opinion in reference to the law on some point
not necessary to be decided, and not intended to be definitely settled
in the cause.

Sem"ble, a. Like; resembling. [Obs.] T. Hudson.

Sem"bling (?), n. [Cf. Assemble.] (Zoöl.) The practice of attracting
the males of Lepidoptera or other insects by exposing the female
confined in a cage.

It is often adopted by collectors in order to procure specimens of rare
species.

||Se*mé" (?), a. [F. semé, fr. semer to sow.] (Her.) Sprinkled or sown;
||-- said of field, or a charge, when strewed or covered with small
||charges.

{ Se`mei*og"ra*phy (?), or Se`mi*og"ra*phy (?) }, n. [Gr. shmei^on sign
+ -graphy.] (Med.) A description of the signs of disease.

{ Se`mei*o*log"ic*al (?), or Se`mi*o*log"io*al }, a. Of or pertaining
to the science of signs, or the systematic use of signs; as, a
semeiological classification of the signs or symptoms of disease; a
semeiological arrangement of signs used as signals.

{ Se`mei*ol"o*gy (?), or Se`mi*ol"o*gy }, n. [Gr. shmei^on a mark, a
sign + - logy.] The science or art of signs. Specifically: (a) (Med.)
The science of the signs or symptoms of disease; symptomatology. (b)
The art of using signs in signaling.

{ Se`mei*ot"ic (?), or Se`mi*ot"ic }, a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, fr.
shmei^on a mark, a sign.] 1. Relating to signs or indications;
pertaining to the language of signs, or to language generally as
indicating thought.

2. (Med.) Of or pertaining to the signs or symptoms of diseases.

{ Se`mei*ot"ics (?), or Se`mi*ot"ics }, n. Semeiology.

Sem"e*le (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;.] (Gr. Myth.) A daughter of
Cadmus, and by Zeus mother of Bacchus.

||Se"men (?), n.; pl. Semina (#). [L., from the root of serere, satum,
||to sow. See Sow to scatter seed.] 1. (Bot.) The seed of plants.

2. (Physiol.) The seed or fecundating fluid of male animals; sperm. It
is a white or whitish viscid fluid secreted by the testes,
characterized by the presence of spermatozoids to which it owes its
generative power.

Semen contra, or Semen cinæ or cynæ, a strong aromatic, bitter drug,
imported from Aleppo and Barbary, said to consist of the leaves,
peduncles, and unexpanded flowers of various species of Artemisia;
wormseed.

Sem`e*nif"er*ous (?), a. (Biol.) Seminiferous.

<! p. 1308 !>

Se*mes"ter (?), n. [G., from L. semestris half-yearly; sex six + mensis
a month.] A period of six months; especially, a term in a college or
uneversity which divides the year into two terms.

Sem"i- (?). [L. semi; akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?;, Skr. smi-, AS. sm-, and
prob. to E. same, from the division into two parts of the same size.
Cf. Hemi-, Sandelend.] A prefix signifying half, and sometimes partly
or imperfectly; as, semiannual, half yearly; semitransparent,
imperfectly transparent.

The prefix semi is joined to another word either with the hyphen or
without it. In this book the hyphen is omitted except before a capital
letter; as, semiacid, semiaquatic, semi-Arian, semiaxis,
semicalcareous.

Sem`i*ac"id (?), a. Slightly acid; subacid.

Sem`i*a*cid"i*fied (?), a. Half acidified.

Sem`i*ad*her"ent (?), a. Adherent part way.

Sem`i*am*plex"i*caul (?), a. (Bot.) Partially amplexicaul; embracing
the stem half round, as a leaf.

Sem"i*an`gle (?), n. (Geom.) The half of a given, or measuring, angle.

Sem`i*an"nu*al (?), a. Half- yearly.

Sem`i*an"nu*al*ly, adv. Every half year.

Sem`i*an"nu*lar (?), a. Having the figure of a half circle; forming a
semicircle. Grew.

Sem`i-A"ri*an (?), n. [See Arian.] (Eccl. Hist.) A member of a branch
of the Arians which did not acknowledge the Son to be consubstantial
with the Father, that is, of the same substance, but admitted him to be
of a like substance with the Father, not by nature, but by a peculiar
privilege.

Sem"i-A"ri*an, a. Of or pertaining to Semi-Arianism.

Sem`i-A"ri*an*ism (?), n. The doctrines or tenets of the Semi-Arians.

Sem`i*ax"is (?), n. (Geom.) One half of the axis of an &?;llipse or
other figure.

Sem`i*bar*ba"ri*an (?), a. Half barbarous; partially civilized. -- n.
One partly civilized.

Sem`i*bar*bar"ic (?), a. Half barbarous or uncivilized; as,
semibarbaric display.

Sem`i*bar"ba*rism (?), n. The quality or state of being half barbarous
or uncivilized.

Sem`i*bar"ba*rous (?), a. Half barbarous.

Sem"i*breve` (?), n. [Pref. semi- + breve: cf. F. semi-breve, It.
semibreve.] [Formerly written semibref.] (Mus.) A note of half the time
or duration of the breve; -- now usually called a whole note. It is the
longest note in general use.

Sem"i*brief` (?), n. (Mus.) A semibreve. [R.]

Sem"i*bull` (?), n. (R.C.Ch.) A bull issued by a pope in the period
between his election and coronation.

Sem`i*cal*ca"re*ous (?), a. Half or partially calcareous; as, a
semicalcareous plant.

Sem`i*cal*cined" (?), a. Half calcined; as, semicalcined iron.

Sem`i*cas"trate (?), v. t. To deprive of one testicle. --
Sem`i*cas*tra"tion (#),n.

Sem`i*cen*ten"ni*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to half of a century, or a
period of fifty years; as, a semicentennial commemoration.

Sem`i*cen*ten"ni*al, n. A fiftieth anniversary.

Sem`i*cha*ot"ic (?), a. Partially chaotic.

Sem"i*cho`rus, n. (Mus.) A half chorus; a passage to be sung by a
selected portion of the voices, as the female voices only, in contrast
with the full choir.

Sem`i-Chris"tian*ized (?), a. Half Christianized.

Sem"i*cir`cle (?), n. 1. (a) The half of a circle; the part of a circle
bounded by its diameter and half of its circumference. (b) A
semicircumference.

2. A body in the form of half of a circle, or half of a circumference.

3. An instrument for measuring angles.

Sem"i*cir`cled (?), a. Semicircular. Shak.

Sem`i*cir"cu*lar (?), a. Having the form of half of a circle. Addison.

Semicircular canals (Anat.), certain canals of the inner ear. See under
Ear.

Sem`i cir*cum"fer*ence (?), n. Half of a circumference.

Sem"i*cirque (?), n. A semicircular hollow or opening among trees or
hills. Wordsworth.

Sem"i*co`lon (?), n. The punctuation mark [;] indicating a separation
between parts or members of a sentence more distinct than that marked
by a comma.

Sem"i*col`umn (?), n. A half column; a column bisected longitudinally,
or along its axis.

Sem`i*co*lum"nar (?), a. Like a semicolumn; flat on one side and round
on the other; imperfectly columnar.

Sem`i*com*pact" (?), a. Half compact; imperfectly indurated.

Sem`i*con"scious (?), a. Half conscious; imperfectly conscious. De
Quincey.

Sem"i*cope` (?), n. A short cope, or an inferier kind of cope. [Obs.]
Chaucer.

Sem`i crus*ta"ceous (?), a. Half crustaceous; partially crustaceous.

Sem`i*crys"tal*line (?), a. (Min.) Half crystalline; -- said of certain
cruptive rocks composed partly of crystalline, partly of amorphous
matter.

Sem`i*cu"bic*al (?), a. (Math.) Of or pertaining to the square root of
the cube of a quantity.

Semicubical parabola, a curve in which the ordinates are proportional
to the square roots of the cubes of the abscissas.

{ Sem`i*cu"bi*um (?), Sem`i*cu"pi*um (?), } n. [LL., fr. L. semi half +
cupa tub, cask.] A half bath, or one that covers only the lewer
extremities and the hips; a sitz-bath; a half bath, or hip bath.

{ Sem`i*cy*lin"dric (?), Sem`i*cy*lyn"dric*al (?) } a. Half
cylindrical.

Sem`i*de*is"tic*al (?), a. Half deisticsl; bordering on deism. S.
Miller.

Sem`i*dem"i*qua`ver (?), n. (Mus.) A demisemiquaver; a thirty-second
note.

Sem`i*de*tached" (?), a. Half detached; partly distinct or separate.

Semidetached house, one of two tenements under a single roof, but
separated by a party wall. [Eng.]

Sem`i*di*am"e*ter (?), n. (Math.) Half of a diameter; a right line, or
the length of a right line, drawn from the center of a circle, a
sphere, or other curved figure, to its circumference or periphery; a
radius.

Sem`i*di`a*pa"son (?), n. (Mus.) An imperfect octave.

Sem`i*di`a*pen"te (?), n. (Mus.) An imperfect or diminished fifth.
Busby.

Sem`i*di`a*pha*ne"i*ty (?), n. Half or imperfect transparency;
translucency. [R.] Boyle.

Sem`i*di*aph"a*nous (?), a. Half or imperfectly transparent;
translucent. Woodward.

Sem`i*di`a*tes"sa*ron (?), n. (Mus.) An imperfect or diminished fourth.
[R.]

Sem`i*di"tone` (?), n. [Pref. semi-  + ditone: cf. It. semiditono. Cf.
Hemiditone.] (Gr. Mus.) A lesser third, having its terms as 6 to 5; a
hemiditone. [R.]

Sem`i*di*ur"nal (?), a. 1. Pertaining to, or accomplished in, half a
day, or twelve hours; occurring twice every day.

2. Pertaining to, or traversed in, six hours, or in half the time
between the rising and setting of a heavenly body; as, a semidiurnal
arc.

Sem"i*dome` (?), n. (Arch.) A roof or ceiling covering a semicircular
room or recess, or one of nearly that shape, as the apse of a church, a
niche, or the like. It is approximately the quarter of a hollow sphere.

Sem"i*dou`ble (?), n. (Eccl.) An office or feast celebrated with less
solemnity than the double ones. See Double, n., 8.

Sem`i*dou"ble, a. (Bot.) Having the outermost stamens converted into
petals, while the inner ones remain perfect; -- said of a flower.

Sem"i*fa`ble (?), n. That which is part fable and part truth; a mixture
of truth and fable. De Quincey.

Sem"i*flexed` (?), a. Half bent.

Sem"i*flo`ret (?), n. (Bot.) See Semifloscule.

Sem`i*flos"cu*lar (?), a. Semiflosculous.

Sem"i*flos`cule (?), n. (Bot.) A floscule, or florest, with its corolla
prolonged into a strap- shaped petal; -- called also semifloret.

Sem`i*flos"cu*lous (?), a. (Bot.) Having all the florets ligulate, as
in the dandelion.

Sem`i*flu"id (?), a. Imperfectly fluid. -- n. A semifluid substance.

Sem"i*form` (?), n. A half form; an imperfect form.

Sem"i*formed` (?), a. Half formed; imperfectly formed; as, semiformed
crystals.

Sem`i*glu"tin (?), n. (Physiol. Chem.) A peptonelike body, insoluble in
alcohol, formed by boiling collagen or gelatin for a long time in
water. Hemicollin, a like body, is also formed at the same time, and
differs from semiglutin by being partly soluble in alcohol.

Sem`i*his*tor"i*cal (?), a. Half or party historical. Sir G. C. Lewis.

Sem`i*ho"ral (?), a. Half- hourly.

Sem`i*in"du*ra`ted (?), a. Imperfectly indurated or hardened.

Sem`i*la*pid"i*fied (?), a. Imperfectly changed into stone. Kirwan.

Sem"i*lens` (?), n. (Opt.) The half of a lens divided along a plane
passing through its axis.

Sem`i*len*tic"u*lar (?), a. Half lenticular or convex; imperfectly
resembling a lens. Kirwan.

Sem`i*lig"ne*ous (?), a. Half or partially ligneous, as a stem partly
woody and partly herbaceous.

Sem`i*liq"uid (?), a. Half liquid; semifluid.

Sem`i*li*quid"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being semiliquid;
partial liquidity.

Sem`i*log"ic*al (?), a. Half logical; partly logical; said of
fallacies. Whately.

Sem"i*lor (?), n. [Cf. G. similor, semilor.] A yellowish alloy of
copper and zinc. See Simplor.

Sem`i*lu"nar (?), a. Shaped like a half moon.

Semilunar bone (Anat.), a bone of the carpus; the lunar. See Lunar, n.
-- Semilunar, or Sigmoid, valves (Anat.), the valves at the beginning
of the aorta and of the pulmonary artery which prevent the blood from
flowing back into the ventricle.

Sem`i*lu"nar, n. (Anat.) The semilunar bone.

Sem`i*lu"na*ry (?), a. Semilunar.

Sem`i*lu"nate (?), a. Semilunar.

Sem"i*lune` (?), n. (Geom.) The half of a lune.

Sem"i*met`al (?), n. (Chem.) An element possessing metallic properties
in an inferior degree and not malleable, as arsenic, antimony, bismuth,
molybdenum, uranium, etc. [Obs.]

Sem`i*me*tal"lic (?), a. (Chem.) Of or pertaining to a semimetal;
possessing metallic properties in an inferior degree; resembling metal.

Sem`i*month"ly (?) a. Coming or made twice in a month; as, semimonthly
magazine; a semimonthly payment. -- n. Something done or made every
half month; esp., a semimonthly periodical. -- adv. In a semimonthly
manner; at intervals of half a month.

Sem`i*mute" (?), a. Having the faculty of speech but imperfectly
developed or partially lost.

Sem"i*mute` (?), n. A semimute person.

Sem"i*nal (?), a. [L. seminalis, fr. semen, seminis, seed, akin to
serere to sow: cf. F. seminal. See Sow to scatter seed.] 1. Pertaining
to, containing, or consisting of, seed or semen; as, the seminal fluid.

2. Contained in seed; holding the relation of seed, source, or first
principle; holding the first place in a series of developed results or
consequents; germinal; radical; primary; original; as, seminal
principles of generation; seminal virtue.

    The idea of God is, beyond all question or comparison, the one
    great seminal principle.


Hare.

Seminal leaf (Bot.), a seed leaf, or cotyleden. -- Seminal receptacle.
(Zoöl.) Same as Spermatheca.

Sem"i*nal (?), n. A seed. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sem`i*nal"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being seminal. Sir T.
Browne.

{ Sem`i*na"ri*an (?), Sem"i*na*rist (?), } n. [Cf. F. séminariste.] A
member of, or one educated in, a seminary; specifically, an
ecclesiastic educated for the priesthood in a seminary.

Sem"i*na*ry (?), n.; pl. Seminaries (#). [L. seminarium, fr. seminarius
belonging to seed, fr. semon, seminis, seed. See Seminal.] 1. A piece
of ground where seed is sown for producing plants for transplantation;
a nursery; a seed plat. [Obs.] Mortimer.

    But if you draw them [seedling] only for the thinning of your
    seminary, prick them into some empty beds.


Evelyn.

2. Hence, the place or original stock whence anything is brought or
produced. [Obs.] Woodward.

3. A place of education, as a scool of a high grade, an academy,
college, or university.

4. Seminal state. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

5. Fig.: A seed bed; a source. [Obs.] Harvey.

6. A Roman Catholic priest educated in a foreign seminary; a
seminarist. [Obs.] Jer. Taylor.

Sem"i*na*ry, a. [L. seminarius.] Belonging to seed; seminal. [R.]

Sem"i*nate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Seminated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Seminating.] [L. seminatus, p. p. of seminare to sow, fr. semen,
seminis, seed.] To sow; to spread; to propagate. [R.] Waterhouse.

Sem`i*na"tion (?), n. [L. seminatio: cf. F. sémination.] 1. The act of
sowing or spreading. [R.]

2. (Bot.) Natural dispersion of seeds. Martyn.

Sem"ined (?), a. [See Semen.] Thickly covered or sown, as with seeds.
[Obs.] B. Jonson.

Sem`i*nif"er*ous (?), a. [L. semen, semenis, seed -ferous.] (Biol.)
Seed-bearing; producing seed; pertaining to, or connected with, the
formation of semen; as, seminiferous cells or vesicles.

{ Sem`i*nif"ic (?), Sem`i*nif"ic*al (?), } a. [L. semen, seminis, seed
+ facere to make.] (Biol.) Forming or producing seed, or the male
generative product of animals or of plants.

Sem`i*ni*fi*ca"tion (?), n. Propagation from seed. [R.] Sir M. Hale.

Sem"i*nist (?), n. (Biol.) A believer in the old theory that the newly
created being is formed by the admixture of the seed of the male with
the supposed seed of the female.

Sem"i*noles (?), n. pl.; sing. Seminole (&?;). (Ethnol.) A tribe of
Indians who formerly occupied Florida, where some of them still remain.
They belonged to the Creek Confideration.

Sem"i*nose` (?), n. [L. semen seed + glucose.] (Chem.) A carbohydrate
of the glucose group found in the thickened endosperm of certain seeds,
and extracted as yellow sirup having a sweetish-bitter taste.

Sem`i*nude" (?), a. Partially nude; half naked.

Sem"i*nymph` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The pupa of insects which undergo only a
slight change in passing to the imago state.

Sem`i*oc*ca"sion*al*ly (?), adv. Once in a while; on rare occasions.
[Colloq. U. S.]

Sem`i*of*fi"cial (?), a. Half official; having some official authority
or importance; as, a semiofficial statement. -- Sem`i*of*fi"cial*ly,
adv.

{ Se`mi*og"ra*phy (?), Se`mi*ol"o*gy (?), Se`mi*o*log"ic*al (?) }. Same
as Semeiography, Semeiology, Semeiological.

Sem`i*o*pa"cous (?), a. Semiopaque.

Sem"i*o`pal (?), n. (Min.) A variety of opal not possessing
opalescence.

Sem`i*o*paque" (?), a. Half opaque; only half transparent.

Sem`i*or*bic"u*lar (?), a. Having the shape of a half orb or sphere.

Se`mi*ot"ic (?), a. Same as Semeiotic.

Se`mi*ot"ics (?), n. Same as Semeiotics.

Sem`i*o"val (?), a. Half oval.

Sem`i*o"vate (?), a. Half ovate.

Sem`i*ox"y*gen*a`ted (?), a. Combined with oxygen only in part. Kirwan.

Sem`i*pa"gan (?), a. Half pagan.

{ Sem`i*pal"mate (?), Sem`i*pal"ma*ted (?), } a. (Zoöl.) Having the
anterior toes joined only part way down with a web; half-webbed; as, a
semipalmate bird or foot. See Illust. k under Aves.

Sem`i*pa*rab"o*la (?), n. (Geom.) One branch of a parabola, being
terminated at the principal vertex of the curve.

Sem"i*ped (?), n. [L. semipes, semipedis; pref. semi- half + pes,
pedis, a foot.] (Pros.) A half foot in poetry.

Se*mip"e*dal (?), a. (Pres.) Containing a half foot.

Sem`i-Pe*la"gi*an (?), n. (Eccl. Hist.) A follower of John Cassianus, a
French monk (died about 448), who modified the doctrines of Pelagius,
by denying human merit, and maintaining the necessity of the Spirit's
influence, while, on the other hand, he rejected the Augustinian
doctrines of election, the inability of man to do good, and the certain
perseverance of the saints.

Sem`i-Pe*la"gi*an, a. Of or pertaining to the Semi-Pelagians, or their
tenets.

<! p. 1309 !>

Sem`i-Pe*la"gi*an*ism (sm`*p*l"j*an*z'm), n. The doctrines or tenets of
the Semi- Pelagians.

Sem`i*pel*lu"cid (-pl*l"sd), a. Half clear, or imperfectly transparent;
as, a semipellucid gem.

Sem`i*pel`lu*cid"i*ty (- pl`l*sd"*t), n. The quality or state of being
imperfectly transparent.

Sem`i*pen"ni*form (-pn"n*fôrm), a. (Anat.) Half or partially penniform;
as, a semipenniform muscle.

Sem`i*per"ma*nent, n. Half or partly permanent.

Sem`i*per*spic"u*ous (- pr*spk"*s), a. Half transparent; imperfectly
clear; semipellucid.

Sem`i*phlo*gis"ti*ca`ted (- fl*js"t*k`td), a. (Old Chem.) Partially
impregnated with phlogiston.

Sem"i*plume` (sm`*plm), n. (Zoöl.) A feather which has a plumelike web,
with the shaft of an ordinary feather.

Sem`i*pre"cious (-prsh"s), a. Somewhat precious; as, semiprecious
stones or metals.

Sem"i*proof` (?), n. Half proof; evidence from the testimony of a
single witness. [Obs.] Bailey.

Sem`i pu"pa (?), n. (Zoöl.) The young of an insect in a stage between
the larva and pupa.

{ Sem"i*quad`rate (?), Sem"i*quar"tile (?), } n. (Astrol.) An aspect of
the planets when distant from each other the half of a quadrant, or
forty-five degrees, or one sign and a half. Hutton.

Sem"i*qua`ver (?), n. (Mus.) A note of half the duration of the quaver;
-- now usually called a sixsteenth note.

Sem"i*quin`tile (?), n. (Astrol.) An aspect of the planets when distant
from each other half of the quintile, or thirty-six degrees.

Sem`i*rec"on*dite (?), a. (Zool.) Half hidden or half covered; said of
the head of an insect when half covered by the shield of the thorax.

Sem"i*ring` (?), n. (Anat.) One of the incomplete rings of the upper
part of the bronchial tubes of most birds. The semerings form an
essential part of the syrinx, or musical organ, of singing birds.

Sem`i*sav"age (?), a. Half savage.

Sem"i*sav`age, n. One who is half savage.

Sem`i-Sax"on (?), a. Half Saxon; -- specifically applied to the
language intermediate between Saxon and English, belonging to the
period 1150-1250.

Sem"i*sex"tile (?), n. (Astrol.) An aspect of the planets when they are
distant from each other the twelfth part of a circle, or thirty
degrees. Hutton.

Sem`i*sol"id (?), a. Partially solid.

Sem"i*soun (-sn), n. A half sound; a low tone. [Obs.] "Soft he cougheth
with a semisoun." Chaucer.

{ Sem`i*spher"ic (?), Sem`i*spher"ic*al (?), } a. Having the figure of
a half sphere. Kirwan.

Sem`i*sphe*roid"al (?), a. Formed like a half spheroid.

Sem"i*steel` (&?;), n. Puddled steel. [U. S. ]

||Sem"i*ta (?), n.; pl. Semitæ. [L., a path.] (Zoöl.) A fasciole of a
||spatangoid sea urchin.

Sem"i*tan`gent (?), n. (Geom.) The tangent of half an arc.

Sem"ite (?), n. One belonging to the Semitic race. Also used
adjectively. [Written also Shemite.]

Sem`i*te*rete" (?), a. (Nat. Hist.) Half terete.

Sem`i*ter"tian (?), a. (Med.) Having the characteristics of both a
tertian and a quotidian intermittent. -- n. An intermittent combining
the characteristics of a tertian and a quotidian.

Sem*it"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to Shem or his descendants;
belonging to that division of the Caucasian race which includes the
Arabs, Jews, and related races. [Written also Shemitic.]

Semitic language, a name used to designate a group of Asiatic and
African languages, some living and some dead, namely: Hebrew and
Phœnician, Aramaic, Assyrian, Arabic, Ethiopic (Geez and Ampharic).
Encyc. Brit.

Sem"i*tism (?), n. A Semitic idiom; a word of Semitic origin. [Written
also Shemitism.]

Sem"i*tone (?), n. [Pref. semi- + tone. CF. Hemitone.] (Mus.) Half a
tone; -- the name commonly applied to the smaller intervals of the
diatonic scale.

There is an impropriety in the use of this word, and half step is now
preferred. See Tone. J. S. Dwight.

Sem`i*ton"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to a semitone; consisting of a
semitone, or of semitones.

Sem"i*tran`sept (?), n. (Arch.) The half of a transept; as, the north
semitransept of a church.

Sem`i*trans*lu"cent (?), a. Slightly clear; transmitting light in a
slight degree.

Sem`i*trans*par"en*cy (?), n. Imperfect or partial transparency.

Sem`i*trans*par"ent (?), a. Half or imperfectly transparent.

Sem`i*ver*tic"il*late, (&?;) a. Partially verticillate.

Sem"i*vif (?), a. [L. semivivus.] Only half alive. [Obs.] Piers
Plowman.

Sem`i*vit"re*ous (?), a. Partially vitreous.

Sem`i*vit"ri*fi*ca"tion (?), n. 1. The quality or state of being
semivitrified.

2. A substance imperfectly vitrified.

Sem`i*vit"ri*fied (?), a. Half or imperfectly vitrified; partially
converted into glass.

Sem`i*vo"cal (?), a. (Phon.) Of or pertaining to a semivowel; half
cocal; imperfectly sounding.

Sem"i*vow`el (?), n. (Phon.) (a) A sound intermediate between a vowel
and a consonant, or partaking of the nature of both, as in the English
w and y. (b) The sign or letter representing such a sound.

Sem`i*week"ly (?), a. Coming, or made, or done, once every half week;
as, a semiweekly newspaper; a semiweekly trip. -- n. That which comes
or happens once every half week, esp. a semiweekly periodical. -- adv.
At intervals of half a week each.

||Sem`o*lel"la (?), n. [It.] See Semolina.

Sem`o*li"na (?), n. [It. semolino, from semola bran, L. simila the
finest wheat flour. Cf. Semoule, Simnel.] The fine, hard parts of
wheat, rounded by the attrition of the millstones, -- used in cookery.

||Sem`o*li"no (?), n. [It.] Same as Semolina.

||Se*moule" (?), n. [F.] Same as Semolina.

Sem`per*vi"rent (?), a. [L. semper always + virens, p. pr. of virere to
be green.] Always fresh; evergreen. [R.] Smart.

Sem"per*vive (?), n. [L. semperviva, sempervivum, fr. sempervivus ever-
living; semper always + vivus living.] (Bot.) The houseleek.

||Sem`per*vi"vum (?), n. (Bot.) A genus of fleshy-leaved plants, of
||which the houseleek (Sempervivum tectorum) is the commonest species.

Sem`pi*ter"nal (?), a. [L. sempiternus, fr. semper always: cf. F.
sempiternel.] 1. Of neverending duration; everlasting; endless; having
beginning, but no end. Sir M. Hale.

2. Without beginning or end; eternal. Blackmore.

Sem"pi*terne (?), a. Sempiternal. [Obs.]

Sem`pi*ter"ni*ty (?), n. [L. sempiternitas.] Future duration without
end; the relation or state of being sempiternal. Sir M. Hale.

Sem"pre (?), adv. [It., fr. L. semper.] (Mus.) Always; throughout; as,
sempre piano, always soft.

Semp"ster (?), n. A seamster. [Obs.]

Semp"stress (?), n. A seamstress.

    Two hundred sepstress were employed to make me shirts.


Swift.

Semp"stress*y (?), n. Seamstressy.

Sem"ster (?), n. A seamster. [Obs.]

||Se*mun"ci*a (?), n. [L., fr. semi half + uncia ounce.] (Rom. Antiq.)
||A Roman coin equivalent to one twenty-fourth part of a Roman pound.

Sen (?), n. A Japanese coin, worth about one half of a cent.

Sen, adv., prep., & conj. [See Since.] Since. [Obs.]

Sen"a*ry (?), a. [L. senarius, fr. seni six each, fr. sex six. See
Six.] Of six; belonging to six; containing six. Dr. H. More.

Sen"ate (?), n. [OE. senat, F. sénat, fr. L. senatus, fr. senex, gen.
senis, old, an old man. See Senior, Sir.] 1. An assembly or council
having the highest deliberative and legislative functions.
Specifically: (a) (Anc. Rom.) A body of elders appointed or elected
from among the nobles of the nation, and having supreme legislative
authority.

    The senate was thus the medium through which all affairs of the
    whole government had to pass.


Dr. W. Smith.

(b) The upper and less numerous branch of a legislature in various
countries, as in France, in the United States, in most of the separate
States of the United States, and in some Swiss cantons. (c) In general,
a legislative body; a state council; the legislative department of
government.

2. The governing body of the Universities of Cambridge and London.
[Eng.]

3. In some American colleges, a council of elected students, presided
over by the president of the college, to which are referred cases of
discipline and matters of general concern affecting the students. [U.
S.]

Senate chamber, a room where a senate meets when it transacts business.
-- Senate house, a house where a senate meets when it transacts
business.

Sen"a*tor (?), n. [OE. senatour, OF. senatour, F. sénateur, fr. L.
senator.] 1. A member of a senate.

    The duke and senators of Venice greet you.


Shak.

In the United States, each State sends two senators for a term of six
years to the national Congress.

2. (O.Eng.Law) A member of the king's council; a king's councilor.
Burrill.

Sen`a*to"ri*al (?), a. [F. sénatorial, or L. senatorius.] 1. Of or
pertaining to a senator, or a senate; becoming to a senator, or a
senate; as, senatorial duties; senatorial dignity.

2. Entitled to elect a senator, or by senators; as, the senatorial
districts of a State. [U. S.]

Sen`a*to"ri*al*ly, adv. In a senatorial manner.

Sen`a*to"ri*an (?), a. Senatorial. [R.] De Quincey.

Sen`a*to"ri*ous (?), a. Senatorial. [Obs.]

Sen"a*tor*ship (?), n. The office or dignity of a senator. Carew.

Se*na`tus*con*sult" (?), n. [L. senatus consultum.] A decree of the
Roman senate.

Send (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sent (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Sending.]
[AS. sendan; akin to OS. sendian, D. zenden, G. senden, OHG. senten,
Icel. senda, Sw. sända, Dan. sende, Goth. sandjan, and to Goth. sinp a
time (properly, a going), gasinpa companion, OHG. sind journey, AS.
s&?;, Icel. sinni a walk, journey, a time. W. hynt a way, journey, OIr.
s&?;t. Cf. Sense.] 1. To cause to go in any manner; to dispatch; to
commission or direct to go; as, to send a messenger.

    I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran.


Jer. xxiii. 21.

    I proceeded forth and came from God; neither came I of myself, but
    he sent me.


John viii. 42.

    Servants, sent on messages, stay out somewhat longer than the
    message requires.


Swift.

2. To give motion to; to cause to be borne or carried; to procure the
going, transmission, or delivery of; as, to send a message.

    He . . . sent letters by posts on horseback.


Esther viii. 10.

    O send out thy light an thy truth; let them lead me.


Ps. xliii. 3.

3. To emit; to impel; to cast; to throw; to hurl; as, to send a ball,
an arrow, or the like.

4. To cause to be or to happen; to bestow; to inflict; to grant; --
sometimes followed by a dependent proposition. "God send him well!"
Shak.

    The Lord shall send upon thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke.


Deut. xxviii. 20.

    And sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.


Matt. v. 45.

    God send your mission may bring back peace.


Sir W. Scott.

Send (?), v. i. 1. To dispatch an agent or messenger to convey a
message, or to do an errand.

    See ye how this son of a murderer hath sent to take away my head?


2 Kings vi. 32.

2. (Naut.) To pitch; as, the ship sends forward so violently as to
endanger her masts. Totten.

To send for, to request or require by message to come or be brought.

Send, n. (Naut.) The impulse of a wave by which a vessel is carried
bodily. [Written also scend.] W. C. Russell. "The send of the sea".
Longfellow.

Sen"dal (?), n. [OF. cendal (cf. Pr. & Sp. cendal, It. zendale), LL.
cendallum, Gr. &?;&?;&?; a fine Indian cloth.] A light thin stuff of
silk. [Written also cendal, and sendal.] Chaucer.

    Wore she not a veil of twisted sendal embroidered with silver?


Sir W. Scott.

Send"er (?), n. One who sends. Shak.

Sen"e*cas (?), n. pl.; sing. Seneca (&?;). (Ethnol.) A tribe of Indians
who formerly inhabited a part of Western New York. This tribe was the
most numerous and most warlike of the Five Nations.

Seneca grass(Bot.), holy grass. See under Holy. -- Seneca eil,
petroleum or naphtha. -- Seneca root, or Seneca snakeroot (Bot.), the
rootstock of an American species of milkworth (Polygala Senega) having
an aromatic but bitter taste. It is often used medicinally as an
expectorant and diuretic, and, in large doses, as an emetic and
cathartic. [Written also Senega root, and Seneka root.]

||Se*ne"ci*o (?), n. [L., groundsel, lit., an old man. So called in
||allusion to the hoary appearance of the pappus.] (Bot.) A very large
||genus of composite plants including the groundsel and the golden
||ragwort.

Se*nec"ti*tude (?), n. [L. senectus aged, old age, senex old.] Old age.
[R.] "Senectitude, weary of its toils." H. Miller.

Sen"e*ga (?), n. (Med.) Seneca root.

Sen"e*gal (?), n. Gum senegal. See under Gum.

Sen"e*gin (?), n. (Med. Chem.) A substance extracted from the rootstock
of the Polygala Senega (Seneca root), and probably identical with
polygalic acid.

Se*nes"cence (?), n. [See Senescent.] The state of growing old; decay
by time.

Se*nes"cent (?), a. [L. senescent, p. pr. of senescere to grow old,
incho. fr. senere to be old.] Growing old; decaying with the lapse of
time. "The night was senescent." Poe. "With too senescent air." Lowell.

Sen"es*chal (?), n. [OF. seneschal, LL. seniscalcus, of Teutonic
origin; cf. Goth. sineigs old, skalks, OHG. scalch, AS. scealc. Cf.
Senior, Marshal.] An officer in the houses of princes and dignitaries,
in the Middle Ages, who had the superintendence of feasts and domestic
ceremonies; a steward. Sometimes the seneschal had the dispensing of
justice, and was given high military commands.

    Then marshaled feast Served up in hall with sewers and seneschale.


Milton.

    Philip Augustus, by a famous ordinance in 1190, first established
    royal courts of justice, held by the officers called baitiffs, or
    seneschals, who acted as the king's lieutenants in his demains.


Hallam.

Sen"es*chal*ship, n. The office, dignity, or jurisdiction of a
seneschal.

Senge (?), v. t. To singe. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sen"green (?), n.[AS. singr&?;ne, properly, evergreen, fr. sin (in
composition) always + grëne green; akin to OHG. sin- ever, L. semper.]
(Bot.) The houseleek.

Se"nile (?), a. [L. senilis, from senex, gen. senis, old, an old man:
cf. F. sénile. See Senior.] Of or pertaining to old age; proceeding
from, or characteristic of, old age; affected with the infirmities of
old age; as, senile weakness. "Senile maturity of judgment." Boyle.

Senile gangrene (Med.), a form of gangrene occuring particularly in old
people, and caused usually by insufficient blood supply due to
degeneration of the walls of the smaller arteries.

Se*nil"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. sénilité.] The quality or state of being
senile; old age.

Sen"ior (?), a. [L. senior, compar. of senex, gen. senis, old. See
Sir.] 1. More advanced than another in age; prior in age; elder; hence,
more advanced in dignity, rank, or office; superior; as, senior member;
senior counsel.

2. Belonging to the final year of the regular course in American
colleges, or in professional schools.

Sen"ior, n. 1. A person who is older than another; one more advanced in
life.

2. One older in office, or whose entrance upon office was anterior to
that of another; one prior in grade.

3. An aged person; an older. Dryden.

    Each village senior paused to scan, And speak the lovely caravan.


Emerson.

4. One in the fourth or final year of his collegiate course at an
American college; -- originally called senior sophister; also, one in
the last year of the course at a professional schools or at a seminary.

Sen*ior"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being senior.

Sen"ior*ize (?), v. i. To exercise authority; to rule; to lord it. [R.]
Fairfax.

Sen"ior*y (?), n. Seniority. [Obs.] Shak.

Sen"na (?), n. [Cf. It. & Sp. sena, Pg. sene, F. séné; all fr. Ar.
san.] 1. (Med.) The leaves of several leguminous plants of the genus
Cassia. (C. acutifolia, C. angustifolia, etc.). They constitute a
valuable but nauseous cathartic medicine.

2. (Bot.) The plants themselves, native to the East, but now cultivated
largely in the south of Europe and in the West Indies.

Bladder senna. (Bot.) See under Bladder. -- Wild senna (Bot.), the
Cassia Marilandica, growing in the United States, the leaves of which
are used medicinally, like those of the officinal senna.

<! p. 1310 !>

Sen"na*chy (?), n. See Seannachie.

Sen"net (?), n. [Properly, a sign given for the entrance or exit of
actors, from OF. sinet, signet, dim. of signe. See Signet.] A signal
call on a trumpet or cornet for entrance or exit on the stage. [Obs.]

Sen"net, n. (Zoöl.) The barracuda.

Sen"night (?), n. [Contr. fr. sevennight.] The space of seven nights
and days; a week. [Written also se'nnight.] [Archaic.] Shak. Tennyson.

Sen"nit (?), n. [Seven + knit.] 1. (Naut.) A braided cord or fabric
formed by plaiting together rope yarns or other small stuff.

2. Plaited straw or palm leaves for making hats.

Se*noc"u*lar (?), a. [L. seni six each (fr. sex six) + oculus eye.]
Having six eyes. [R.] Derham.

Se*no"ni*an (?), a. [F. sénonien, from the district of Sénonais, in
France.] (Geol.) In european geology, a name given to the middle
division of the Upper Cretaceous formation.

||Se*ñor" (?), n. [Sp. Cf. Senior.] A Spanish title of courtesy
||corresponding to the English Mr. or Sir; also, a gentleman.

||Se*ño"ra (?), n. [Sp.] A Spanish title of courtesy given to a lady;
||Mrs.; Madam; also, a lady.

||Se`ño*ri"ta (?), n. [Sp.] A Spanish title of courtesy given to a
||young lady; Miss; also, a young lady.

Sens (?), adv. [See Since.] Since. [Obs.] Spenser.

Sen"sate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sensated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sensating.] [See Sensated.] To feel or apprehend more or less
distinctly through a sense, or the senses; as, to sensate light, or an
odor.

    As those of the one are sensated by the ear, so those of the other
    are by the eye.


R. Hooke.

{ Sen"sate (?), Sen"sa*ted (?), } a. [L. sensatus gifted with sense,
intelligent, fr. sensus sense. See Sense.] Felt or apprehended through
a sense, or the senses. [R.] Baxter.

Sen*sa"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. sensation. See Sensate.] 1. (Physiol.) An
impression, or the consciousness of an impression, made upon the
central nervous organ, through the medium of a sensory or afferent
nerve or one of the organs of sense; a feeling, or state of
consciousness, whether agreeable or disagreeable, produced either by an
external object (stimulus), or by some change in the internal state of
the body.

    Perception is only a special kind of knowledge, and sensation a
    special kind of feeling. . . . Knowledge and feeling, perception
    and sensation, though always coexistent, are always in the inverse
    ratio of each other.


Sir W. Hamilton.

2. A purely spiritual or psychical affection; agreeable or disagreeable
feelings occasioned by objects that are not corporeal or material.

3. A state of excited interest or feeling, or that which causes it.

    The sensation caused by the appearance of that work is still
    remembered by many.


Brougham.

Syn. -- Perception. -- Sensation, Perseption. The distinction between
these words, when used in mental philosophy, may be thus stated; if I
simply smell a rose, I have a sensation; if I refer that smell to the
external object which occasioned it, I have a perception. Thus, the
former is mere feeling, without the idea of an object; the latter is
the mind's apprehension of some external object as occasioning that
feeling. "Sensation properly expresses that change in the state of the
mind which is produced by an impression upon an organ of sense (of
which change we can conceive the mind to be conscious, without any
knowledge of external objects). Perception, on the other hand,
expresses the knowledge or the intimations we obtain by means of our
sensations concerning the qualities of matter, and consequently
involves, in every instance, the notion of externality, or outness,
which it is necessary to exclude in order to seize the precise import
of the word sensation." Fleming.

Sen*sa"tion*al (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to sensation; as,
sensational nerves.

2. Of or pertaining to sensationalism, or the doctrine that sensation
is the sole origin of knowledge.

3. Suited or intended to excite temporarily great interest or emotion;
melodramatic; emotional; as, sensational plays or novels; sensational
preaching; sensational journalism; a sensational report.

Sen*sa"tion*al*ism (?), n. 1. (Metaph.) The doctrine held by Condillac,
and by some ascribed to Locke, that our ideas originate solely in
sensation, and consist of sensations transformed; sensualism; --
opposed to intuitionalism, and rationalism.

2. The practice or methods of sensational writing or speaking; as, the
sensationalism of a novel.

Sen*sa"tion*al*ist, n. 1. (Metaph.) An advocate of, or believer in,
philosophical sensationalism.

2. One who practices sensational writing or speaking.

Sense (sns), n. [L. sensus, from sentire, sensum, to perceive, to feel,
from the same root as E. send; cf. OHG. sin sense, mind, sinnan to go,
to journey, G. sinnen to meditate, to think: cf. F. sens. For the
change of meaning cf. See, v. t. See Send, and cf. Assent, Consent,
Scent, v. t., Sentence, Sentient.] 1. (Physiol.) A faculty, possessed
by animals, of perceiving external objects by means of impressions made
upon certain organs (sensory or sense organs) of the body, or of
perceiving changes in the condition of the body; as, the senses of
sight, smell, hearing, taste, and touch. See Muscular sense, under
Muscular, and Temperature sense, under Temperature.

    Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep.


Shak.

    What surmounts the reach Of human sense I shall delineate.


Milton.

    The traitor Sense recalls The soaring soul from rest.


Keble.

2. Perception by the sensory organs of the body; sensation;
sensibility; feeling.

    In a living creature, though never so great, the sense and the
    affects of any one part of the body instantly make a transcursion
    through the whole.


Bacon.

3. Perception through the intellect; apprehension; recognition;
understanding; discernment; appreciation.

    This Basilius, having the quick sense of a lover.


Sir P. Sidney.

    High disdain from sense of injured merit.


Milton.

4. Sound perception and reasoning; correct judgment; good mental
capacity; understanding; also, that which is sound, true, or
reasonable; rational meaning. "He speaks sense." Shak.

    He raves; his words are loose As heaps of sand, and scattering wide
    from sense.


Dryden.

5. That which is felt or is held as a sentiment, view, or opinion;
judgment; notion; opinion.

    I speak my private but impartial sense With freedom.


Roscommon.

    The municipal council of the city had ceased to speak the sense of
    the citizens.


Macaulay.

6. Meaning; import; signification; as, the true sense of words or
phrases; the sense of a remark.

    So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave the
    sense.


Neh. viii. 8.

    I think 't was in another sense.


Shak.

7. Moral perception or appreciation.

    Some are so hardened in wickedness as to have no sense of the most
    friendly offices.


L' Estrange.

8. (Geom.) One of two opposite directions in which a line, surface, or
volume, may be supposed to be described by the motion of a point, line,
or surface.

Common sense, according to Sir W. Hamilton: (a) "The complement of
those cognitions or convictions which we receive from nature, which all
men possess in common, and by which they test the truth of knowledge
and the morality of actions." (b) "The faculty of first principles."
These two are the philosophical significations. (c) "Such ordinary
complement of intelligence, that,if a person be deficient therein, he
is accounted mad or foolish." (d) When the substantive is emphasized:
"Native practical intelligence, natural prudence, mother wit, tact in
behavior, acuteness in the observation of character, in contrast to
habits of acquired learning or of speculation." -- Moral sense. See
under Moral, (a). -- The inner, or internal, sense, capacity of the
mind to be aware of its own states; consciousness; reflection. "This
source of ideas every man has wholly in himself, and though it be not
sense, as having nothing to do with external objects, yet it is very
like it, and might properly enough be called internal sense." Locke. --
Sense capsule (Anat.), one of the cartilaginous or bony cavities which
inclose, more or less completely, the organs of smell, sight, and
hearing. -- Sense organ (Physiol.), a specially irritable mechanism by
which some one natural force or form of energy is enabled to excite
sensory nerves; as the eye, ear, an end bulb or tactile corpuscle, etc.
- - Sense organule (Anat.), one of the modified epithelial cells in or
near which the fibers of the sensory nerves terminate.

Syn. -- Understanding; reason. -- Sense, Understanding, Reason. Some
philosophers have given a technical signification to these terms, which
may here be stated. Sense is the mind's acting in the direct cognition
either of material objects or of its own mental states. In the first
case it is called the outer, in the second the inner, sense.
Understanding is the logical faculty, i. e., the power of apprehending
under general conceptions, or the power of classifying, arranging, and
making deductions. Reason is the power of apprehending those first or
fundamental truths or principles which are the conditions of all real
and scientific knowledge, and which control the mind in all its
processes of investigation and deduction. These distinctions are given,
not as established, but simply because they often occur in writers of
the present day.

Sense (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sensed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sensing.] To
perceive by the senses; to recognize. [Obs. or Colloq.]

    Is he sure that objects are not otherwise sensed by others than
    they are by him?


Glanvill.

Sense"ful (?), a. Full of sense, meaning, or reason; reasonable;
judicious. [R.] "Senseful speech." Spenser. "Men, otherwise senseful
and ingenious." Norris.

Sense"less, a. Destitute of, deficient in, or contrary to, sense;
without sensibility or feeling; unconscious; stupid; foolish; unwise;
unreasonable.

    You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things.


Shak.

    The ears are senseless that should give us hearing.


Shak.

    The senseless grave feels not your pious sorrows.


Rowe.

    They were a senseless, stupid race.


Swift.

    They would repent this their senseless perverseness when it would
    be too late.


Clarendon.

--- Sense"less*ly, adv. -- Sense"less*ness, n.

Sen`si*bil"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Sensibilities (#). [Cf. F. sensibilité,
LL. sensibilitas.] 1. (Physiol.) The quality or state of being
sensible, or capable of sensation; capacity to feel or perceive.

2. The capacity of emotion or feeling, as distinguished from the
intellect and the will; peculiar susceptibility of impression,
pleasurable or painful; delicacy of feeling; quick emotion or sympathy;
as, sensibility to pleasure or pain; sensibility to shame or praise;
exquisite sensibility; - - often used in the plural. "Sensibilities so
fine!" Cowper.

    The true lawgiver ought to have a heart full of sensibility.


Burke.

    His sensibilities seem rather to have been those of patriotism than
    of wounded pride.


Marshall.

3. Experience of sensation; actual feeling.

    This adds greatly to my sensibility.


Burke.

4. That quality of an instrument which makes it indicate very slight
changes of condition; delicacy; as, the sensibility of a balance, or of
a thermometer.

Syn. -- Taste; susceptibility; feeling. See Taste.

Sen"si*ble (?), a. [F., fr. L. sensibilis, fr. sensus sense.] 1.
Capable of being perceived by the senses; apprehensible through the
bodily organs; hence, also, perceptible to the mind; making an
impression upon the sense, reason, or understanding; &?;&?;&?;&?;&?;&?;
heat; sensible resistance.

    Air is sensible to the touch by its motion.


Arbuthnot.

    The disgrace was more sensible than the pain.


Sir W. Temple.

    Any very sensible effect upon the prices of things.


A. Smith.

2. Having the capacity of receiving impressions from external objects;
capable of perceiving by the instrumentality of the proper organs;
liable to be affected physsically or mentally; impressible.

    Would your cambric were sensible as your finger.


Shak.

3. Hence: Liable to impression from without; easily affected; having
nice perception or acute feeling; sensitive; also, readily moved or
affected by natural agents; delicate; as, a sensible thermometer. "With
affection wondrous sensible." Shak.

4. Perceiving or having perception, either by the senses or the mind;
cognizant; perceiving so clearly as to be convinced; satisfied;
persuaded.

    He [man] can not think at any time, waking or sleeping, without
    being sensible of it.


Locke.

    They are now sensible it would have been better to comply than to
    refuse.


Addison.

5. Having moral perception; capable of being affected by moral good or
evil.

6. Possessing or containing sense or reason; giftedwith, or
characterized by, good or common sense; intelligent; wise.

    Now a sensible man, by and by a fool.


Shak.

Sensible note or tone (Mus.), the major seventh note of any scale; --
so called because, being but a half step below the octave, or key tone,
and naturally leading up to that, it makes the ear sensible of its
approaching sound. Called also the leading tone. -- Sensible horizon.
See Horizon, n., 2. (a).

Syn. -- Intelligent; wise. -- Sensible, Intelligent. We call a man
sensible whose judgments and conduct are marked and governed by sound
judgment or good common semse. We call one intelligent who is quick and
clear in his understanding, i. e., who discriminates readily and nicely
in respect to difficult and important distinction. The sphere of the
sensible man lies in matters of practical concern; of the intelligent
man, in subjects of intellectual interest. "I have been tired with
accounts from sensible men, furnished with matters of fact which have
happened within their own knowledge." Addison. "Trace out numerous
footsteps . . . of a most wise and intelligent architect throughout all
this stupendous fabric." Woodward.

Sen"si*ble (?), n. 1. Sensation; sensibility. [R.] "Our temper changed
. . . which must needs remove the sensible of pain." Milton.

2. That which impresses itself on the sense; anything perceptible.

    Aristotle distinguished sensibles into common and proper.


Krauth-Fleming.

3. That which has sensibility; a sensitive being. [R.]

    This melancholy extends itself not to men only, but even to
    vegetals and sensibles.


Burton.

Sen"si*ble*ness, n. 1. The quality or state of being sensible;
sensibility; appreciation; capacity of perception; susceptibility. "The
sensibleness of the eye." Sharp. "Sensibleness and sorrow for sin."
Hammond.

    The sensibleness of the divine presence.


Hallywell.

2. Intelligence; reasonableness; good sense.

Sen"si*bly, adv. 1. In a sensible manner; so as to be perceptible to
the senses or to the mind; appreciably; with perception; susceptibly;
sensitively.

    What remains past cure, Bear not too sensibly.


Milton.

2. With intelligence or good sense; judiciously.

Sen`si*fa"cient (?), a. [L. sensus sense + facere to make.] Converting
into sensation. Huxley.

Sen*sif"er*ous (?), a. [L. sensifer; sensus sense + ferre to bear.]
Exciting sensation; conveying sensation. Huxley.

Sen*sif"ic (?), a. [L. sensificus; sensus sense + facere to make.]
Exciting sensation.

Sen*sif"i*ca*to*ry (?), a. Susceptible of, or converting into,
sensation; as, the sensificatory part of a nervous system. Huxley.

Sen*sig"e*nous (?), a. [L. sensus sense + -genous.] Causing or exciting
sensation. Huxley.

Sens"ism (?), n. Same as Sensualism, 2 & 3.

Sens"ist, n. One who, in philosophy, holds to sensism.

Sen"si*tive (?), a. [F. sensitif. See Sense.] 1. Having sense of
feeling; possessing or exhibiting the capacity of receiving impressions
from external objects; as, a sensitive soul.

2. Having quick and acute sensibility, either to the action of external
objects, or to impressions upon the mind and feelings; highly
susceptible; easily and acutely affected.

    She was too sensitive to abuse and calumny.


Macaulay.

3. (a) (Mech.) Having a capacity of being easily affected or moved; as,
a sensitive thermometer; sensitive scales. (b) (Chem. & Photog.)
Readily affected or changed by certain appropriate agents; as, silver
chloride or bromide, when in contact with certain organic substances,
is extremely sensitive to actinic rays.

4. Serving to affect the sense; sensible. [R.]

    A sensitive love of some sensitive objects.


Hammond.

5. Of or pertaining to sensation; depending on sensation; as, sensitive
motions; sensitive muscular motions excited by irritation. E. Darwin.

Sensitive fern (Bot.), an American fern (Onoclea sensibilis), the
leaves of which, when plucked, show a slight tendency to fold together.
-- Sensitive flame (Physics), a gas flame so arranged that under a
suitable adjustment of pressure it is exceedingly sensitive to sounds,
being caused to roar, flare, or become suddenly shortened or
extinguished, by slight sounds of the proper pitch. -- Sensitive joint
vetch (Bot.), an annual leguminous herb (Æschynomene hispida), with
sensitive foliage. -- Sensitive paper, paper prepared for photographic
purpose by being rendered sensitive to the effect of light. --
Sensitive plant. (Bot.) (a) A leguminous plant (Mimosa pudica, or M.
sensitiva, and other allied species), the leaves of which close at the
slightest touch. (b) Any plant showing motions after irritation, as the
sensitive brier (Schrankia) of the Southern States, two common American
species of Cassia (C. nictitans, and C. Chamæcrista), a kind of sorrel
(Oxalis sensitiva), etc.

<! p. 1311 !>

-- Sen"si*tive*ly (#), adv. -- Sen"si*tive*ness, n.

Sen`si*tiv"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being sensitive; --
used chiefly in science and the arts; as, the sensitivity of iodized
silver.

    Sensitivity and emotivity have also been used as the scientific
    term for the capacity of feeling.


Hickok.

Sen"si*tize (?), v. t. (Photog.) To render sensitive, or susceptible of
being easily acted on by the actinic rays of the sun; as, sensitized
paper or plate.

Sen"si*ti`zer (?), n. (Photog.) An agent that sensitizes.

    The sensitizer should be poured on the middle of the sheet.


Wilis & Clements (The Platinotype).

Sen"si*to*ry (?), n. See Sensory.

Sens"ive (?), a. Having sense or sensibility; sensitive. [Obs.] Sir P.
Sidney.

Sen"sor (?), a. Sensory; as, the sensor nerves.

Sen*so"ri*al (?), a. [Cf. F. sensorial. See Sensorium.] Of or
pertaining to the sensorium; as, sensorial faculties, motions, powers.
A. Tucker.

Sen*so"ri*um (?), n.; pl. E. Sensoriums (#), L. Sensoria (#). [L., fr.
sentire, sensum, to discern or perceive by the senses.] (Physiol.) The
seat of sensation; the nervous center or centers to which impressions
from the external world must be conveyed before they can be perceived;
the place where external impressions are localized, and transformed
into sensations, prior to being reflected to other parts of the
organism; hence, the whole nervous system, when animated, so far as it
is susceptible of common or special sensations.

Sen*so`ri-vo*li"tion*al (?), a. (Physiol.) Concerned both in sensation
and volition; -- applied to those nerve fibers which pass to and from
the cerebro- spinal axis, and are respectively concerned in sensation
and volition. Dunglison.

Sen"so*ry (?), n.; pl. Sensories (&?;). (Physiol.) Same as Sensorium.

Sen"so*ry, a. (Physiol.) Of or pertaining to the sensorium or
sensation; as, sensory impulses; -- especially applied to those nerves
and nerve fibers which convey to a nerve center impulses resulting in
sensation; also sometimes loosely employed in the sense of afferent, to
indicate nerve fibers which convey impressions of any kind to a nerve
center.

Sen"su*al (?), a. [L. sensualis, from sensus sense: cf. F. sensuel.] 1.
Pertaining to, consisting in, or affecting, the sense, or bodily organs
of perception; relating to, or concerning, the body, in distinction
from the spirit.

    Pleasing and sensual rites and ceremonies.


Bacon.

    Far as creation's ample range extends, The scale of sensual, mental
    powers ascends.


Pope.

2. Hence, not spiritual or intellectual; carnal; fleshly; pertaining
to, or consisting in, the gratification of the senses, or the
indulgence of appetites; wordly.

    These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
    Spirit.


Jude 19.

    The greatest part of men are such as prefer . . . that good which
    is sensual before whatsoever is most divine.


Hooker.

3. Devoted to the pleasures of sense and appetite; luxurious;
voluptuous; lewd; libidinous.

    No small part of virtue consists in abstaining from that wherein
    sensual men place their felicity.


Atterbury.

4. Pertaining or peculiar to the philosophical doctrine of sensualism.

Sen"su*al*ism (?), n. [Cf. F. sensualisme.] 1. The condition or
character of one who is sensual; subjection to sensual feelings and
appetite; sensuality.

2. (Philos.) The doctrine that all our ideas, or the operations of the
understanding, not only originate in sensation, but are transformed
sensations, copies or relics of sensations; sensationalism; sensism.

3. (Ethics) The regarding of the gratification of the senses as the
highest good. Krauth- Fleming.

Sen"su*al*ist, n. [CF. F. sensualiste.] 1. One who is sensual; one
given to the indulgence of the appetites or senses as the means of
happiness.

2. One who holds to the doctrine of sensualism.

Sen`su*al*is"tic (?), a. 1. Sensual.

2. Adopting or teaching the doctrines of sensualism.

Sen`su*al"i*ty (?), n. [CF. F. sensualité, L. sensualitas sensibility,
capacity for sensation.] The quality or state of being sensual;
devotedness to the gratification of the bodily appetites; free
indulgence in carnal or sensual pleasures; luxuriousness;
voluptuousness; lewdness.

    Those pampered animals That rage in savage sensuality.


Shak.

    They avoid dress, lest they should have affections tainted by any
    sensuality.


Addison.

Sen`su*al*i*za"tion (?), n. The act of sensualizing, or the state of
being sensualized.

Sen"su*al*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sensualized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sensualizing (?).] To make sensual; to subject to the love of sensual
pleasure; to debase by carnal gratifications; to carnalize; as,
sensualized by pleasure. Pope.

    By the neglect of prayer, the thoughts are sensualized.


T. H. Skinner.

Sen"su*al*ly, adv. In a sensual manner.

Sen"su*al*ness, n. Sensuality; fleshliness.

Sen"su*ism (?), n. Sensualism.

Sen`su*os"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being sensuous;
sensuousness. [R.]

Sen"su*ous (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to the senses, or sensible
objects; addressing the senses; suggesting pictures or images of sense.

    To this poetry would be made precedent, as being less subtle and
    fine, but more simple, sensuous, and passionate.


Milton.

2. Highly susceptible to influence through the senses.

-- Sen"su*ous*ly (#), adv. -- Sen"su*ous*ness, n.

Sent (?), v. & n. See Scent, v. & n. [Obs.] Spenser.

Sent, obs. 3d pers. sing. pres. of Send, for sendeth.

Sent, imp. & p. p. of Send.

Sen"tence (?), n. [F., from L. sententia, for sentientia, from sentire
to discern by the senses and the mind, to feel, to think. See Sense,
n., and cf. Sentiensi.] 1. Sense; meaning; significance. [Obs.]

    Tales of best sentence and most solace.


Chaucer.

    The discourse itself, voluble enough, and full of sentence.


Milton.

2. (a) An opinion; a decision; a determination; a judgment, especially
one of an unfavorable nature.

    My sentence is for open war.


Milton.

    That by them [Luther's works] we may pass sentence upon his
    doctrines.


Atterbury.

(b) A philosophical or theological opinion; a dogma; as, Summary of the
Sentences; Book of the Sentences.

3. (Law) In civil and admiralty law, the judgment of a court pronounced
in a cause; in criminal and ecclesiastical courts, a judgment passed on
a criminal by a court or judge; condemnation pronounced by a judgical
tribunal; doom. In common law, the term is exclusively used to denote
the judgment in criminal cases.

    Received the sentence of the law.


Shak.

4. A short saying, usually containing moral instruction; a maxim; an
axiom; a saw. Broome.

5. (Gram.) A combination of words which is complete as expressing a
thought, and in writing is marked at the close by a period, or full
point. See Proposition, 4.

Sentences are simple or compound. A simple sentence consists of one
subject and one finite verb; as, "The Lord reigns." A compound sentence
contains two or more subjects and finite verbs, as in this verse: -

    He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.


Pope.

Dark sentence, a saving not easily explained.

    A king . . . understanding dark sentences.


Dan. vii. 23.

Sen"tence, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sentenced (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sentencing (?).] 1. To pass or pronounce judgment upon; to doom; to
condemn to punishment; to prescribe the punishment of.

    Nature herself is sentenced in your doom.


Dryden.

2. To decree or announce as a sentence. [Obs.] Shak.

3. To utter sententiously. [Obs.] Feltham.

Sen"ten*cer (?), n. One who pronounced a sentence or condemnation.

sen*ten"tial (?), a. 1. Comprising sentences; as, a sentential
translation. Abp. Newcome.

2. Of or pertaining to a sentence, or full period; as, a sentential
pause.

Sen*ten"tial*ly, adv. In a sentential manner.

Sen*ten"ti*a*rist (?), n. A sententiary. Barnas Sears (Life of Luther).

Sen*ten"ti*ary (?), n. [LL. sententiarius.] One who read lectures, or
commented, on the Sentences of Peter Lombard, Bishop of Paris
(1159-1160), a school divine. R. Henry.

Sen*ten`ti*os"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being sententious.
[Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sen*ten"tious (?), a.[L. sentenciosus: cf. F. sentencieux.] 1.
Abounding with sentences, axioms, and maxims; full of meaning; terse
and energetic in expression; pithy; as, a sententious style or
discourse; sententious truth.

    How he apes his sire, Ambitiously sententious!


Addison.

2. Comprising or representing sentences; sentential. [Obs.]
"Sententious marks." Grew.

--- Sen*ten"tious*ly, adv. -- Sen*ten"tious*ness, n.

Sen"ter*y (?), n. A sentry. [Obs.] Milton.

Sen"teur (?), n. [F.] Scent. [Obs.] Holland.

{ Sen"ti*ence (?), Sen"ti*en*cy (?), } n. [See Sentient, Sentence.] The
quality or state of being sentient; esp., the quality or state of
having sensation. G. H. Lewes

    An example of harmonious action between the intelligence and the
    sentieny of the mind.


Earle.

Sen"ti*ent (?), a. [L. sentiens, -entis, p. pr. of sentire to discern
or perceive by the senses. See Sense.] Having a faculty, or faculties,
of sensation and perception. Specif. (Physiol.), especially sensitive;
as, the sentient extremities of nerves, which terminate in the various
organs or tissues.

Sen"ti*ent, n. One who has the faculty of perception; a sentient being.

Sen"ti*ent*ly, adv. In a sentient or perceptive way.

Sen"ti*ment (?), n. [OE. sentement, OF. sentement, F. sentiment, fr. L.
sentire to perceive by the senses and mind, to feel, to think. See
Sentient, a.] 1. A thought prompted by passion or feeling; a state of
mind in view of some subject; feeling toward or respecting some person
or thing; disposition prompting to action or expression.

    The word sentiment, agreeably to the use made of it by our best
    English writers, expresses, in my own opinion very happily, those
    complex determinations of the mind which result from the
    coöperation of our rational powers and of our moral feelings.


Stewart.

    Alike to council or the assembly came, With equal souls and
    sentiments the same.


Pope.

2. Hence, generally, a decision of the mind formed by deliberation or
reasoning; thought; opinion; notion; judgment; as, to express one's
sentiments on a subject.

    Sentiments of philosophers about the perception of external
    objects.


Reid.

    Sentiment, as here and elsewhere employed by Reid in the meaning of
    opinion (sententia), is not to be imitated.


Sir W. Hamilton.

3. A sentence, or passage, considered as the expression of a thought; a
maxim; a saying; a toast.

4. Sensibility; feeling; tender susceptibility.

    Mr. Hume sometimes employs (after the manner of the French
    metaphysicians) sentiment as synonymous with feeling; a use of the
    word quite unprecedented in our tongue.


Stewart.

    Less of sentiment than sense.


Tennyson.

Syn. -- Thought; opinion; notion; sensibility; feeling. -- Sentiment,
Opinion, Feeling. An opinion is an intellectual judgment in respect to
any and every kind of truth. Feeling describes those affections of
pleasure and pain which spring from the exercise of our sentient and
emotional powers. Sentiment (particularly in the plural) lies between
them, denoting settled opinions or principles in regard to subjects
which interest the feelings strongly, and are presented more or less
constantly in practical life. Hence, it is more appropriate to speak of
our religious sentiments than opinions, unless we mean to exclude all
reference to our feelings. The word sentiment, in the singular, leans
ordinarily more to the side of feeling, and denotes a refined
sensibility on subjects affecting the heart. "On questions of feeling,
taste, observation, or report, we define our sentiments. On questions
of science, argument, or metaphysical abstraction, we define our
opinions. The sentiments of the heart. The opinions of the mind . . .
There is more of instinct in sentiment, and more of definition in
opinion. The admiration of a work of art which results from first
impressions is classed with our sentiments; and, when we have accounted
to ourselves for the approbation, it is classed with our opinions." W.
Taylor.

Sen`ti*men"tal (?), a. [Cf. F. sentimental.] 1. Having, expressing, or
containing a sentiment or sentiments; abounding with moral reflections;
containing a moral reflection; didactic. [Obsoles.]

    Nay, ev'n each moral sentimental stroke, Where not the character,
    but poet, spoke, He lopped, as foreign to his chaste design, Nor
    spared a useless, though a golden line.


Whitehead.

2. Inclined to sentiment; having an excess of sentiment or sensibility;
indulging the sensibilities for their own sake; artificially or
affectedly tender; -- often in a reproachful sense.

    A sentimental mind is rather prone to overwrought feeling and
    exaggerated tenderness.


Whately.

3. Addressed or pleasing to the emotions only, usually to the weaker
and the unregulated emotions.

Syn. -- Romantic. -- Sentimental, Romantic. Sentimental usually
describes an error or excess of the sensibilities; romantic, a vice of
the imagination. The votary of the former gives indulgence to his
sensibilities for the mere luxury of their excitement; the votary of
the latter allows his imagination to rove for the pleasure of creating
scenes of ideal enjoiment. "Perhaps there is no less danger in works
called sentimental. They attack the heart more successfully, because
more cautiously." V. Knox. "I can not but look on an indifferency of
mind, as to the good or evil things of this life, as a mere romantic
fancy of such who would be thought to be much wiser than they ever
were, or could be." Bp. Stillingfleet.

Sen`ti*men"tal*ism (?), n. [Cf. F. sentimentalisme.] The quality of
being sentimental; the character or behavior of a sentimentalist;
sentimentality.

Sen`ti*men"tal*ist, n. [Cf. F. sentimentaliste.] One who has, or
affects, sentiment or fine feeling.

Sen`ti*men*tal"i*ty (?), n. [CF. F. sentimentalité.] The quality or
state of being sentimental.

Sen`ti*men"tal*ize (?), v. t. To regard in a sentimental manner; as, to
sentimentalize a subject.

Sen`ti*men"tal*ize, v. i. To think or act in a sentimental manner, or
like a sentimentalist; to affect exquisite sensibility. C. Kingsley.

Sen`ti*men"tal*ly, adv. In a sentimental manner.

Sen"tine (?), n. [L. sentina bilge water, hold of a ship, dregs: cf. F.
sentine.] A place for dregs and dirt; a sink; a sewer. [Obs.] Latimer.

Sen"ti*nel, n. [F. sentinelle (cf. It. sentinella); probably
originally, a litle path, the sentinel's beat,, and a dim. of a word
meaning, path; cf. F. sente path. L. semita; and OF. sentine, sentele,
senteret, diminutive words. Cf. Sentry.] 1. One who watches or guards;
specifically (Mil.), a soldier set to guard an army, camp, or other
place, from surprise, to observe the approach of danger, and give
notice of it; a sentry.

    The sentinels who paced the ramparts.


Macaulay.

2. Watch; guard. [Obs.] "That princes do keep due sentinel." Bacon.

3. (Zoöl.) A marine crab (Podophthalmus vigil) native of the Indian
Ocean, remarkable for the great length of its eyestalks; -- called also
sentinel crab.

Sen"ti*nel, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sentineled (?) or Sentinelled; p. pr. &
vb. n. Sentineling or Sentinelling.] 1. To watch over like a sentinel.
"To sentinel enchanted land." [R.] Sir W. Scott.

2. To furnish with a sentinel; to place under the guard of a sentinel
or sentinels.

Sen`ti*sec"tion (?), n. [L. sentire to feel + E. section.] Painful
vivisection; -- opposed to callisection. B. G. Wilder.

Sen"try (?), n.; pl. Sentires (#). [Probably from OF. senteret a little
patch; cf. F. sentier path, and OF. sente. See Sentinel.] 1. (Mil.) A
soldier placed on guard; a sentinel.

2. Guard; watch, as by a sentinel.

    Here toils, and death, and death's half-brother, sleep, Forms
    terrible to view, their sentry keep.


Dryden.

Sentry box, a small house or box to cover a sentinel at his post, and
shelter him from the weather.

||Sen"za (?), prep. [It.] (Mus.) Without; as, senza stromenti, without
||instruments.

Se"pal (?), n. [NL. sepalum, formed in imitation of NL. petalum, petal,
to denote one of the divisions of the calyx: cf. F. sépale.] (Bot.) A
leaf or division of the calyx.

When the calyx consists of but one part, it is said to be monosepalous;
when of two parts, it is said to be disepalous; when of a variable and
indefinite number of parts, it is said to be polysepalous; when of
several parts united, it is properly called gamosepalous.

<! p. 1312 !>

Se"paled (?), a. (Bot.) Having one or more sepals.

Sep"al*ine (?), a. (Bot.) Relating to, or having the nature of, sepals.

Se*pal"o*dy (?), n. [Sepal + Gr. &?;&?;&?; form.] (Bot.) The
metamorphosis of other floral organs into sepals or sepaloid bodies.

Sep"al*oid (?), a. [Sepal + - oid.] (Bot.) Like a sepal, or a division
of a calyx.

Sep"al*ous (?), a. (Bot.) Having, or relating to, sepals; -- used
mostly in composition. See under Sepal.

Sep`a*ra*bil"i*ty (?), n. Quality of being separable or divisible;
divisibility; separableness.

Sep"a*ra*ble (?), a. [L. separabilis: cf. F. séparable.] Capable of
being separated, disjoined, disunited, or divided; as, the separable
parts of plants; qualities not separable from the substance in which
they exist. -- Sep"a*ra*ble*ness, n. -- Sep"a*ra*bly, adv.

    Trials permit me not to doubt of the separableness of a yellow
    tincture from gold.


Boyle.

Sep"a*rate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Separated (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n.
Separating.] [L. separatus, p. p. of separare to separate; pfref. se-
aside + parare to make ready, prepare. See Parade, and cf. Sever.] 1.
To disunite; to divide; to disconnect; to sever; to part in any manner.

    From the fine gold I separate the alloy.


Dryden.

    Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me.


Gen. xiii. 9.

    Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?


Rom. viii. 35.

2. To come between; to keep apart by occupying the space between; to
lie between; as, the Mediterranean Sea separates Europe and Africa.

3. To set apart; to select from among others, as for a special use or
service.

    Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called
    thaem.


Acts xiii. 2.

Separated flowers (Bot.), flowers which have stamens and pistils in
separate flowers; diclinous flowers. Gray.

Sep"a*rate, v. i. To part; to become disunited; to be disconnected; to
withdraw from one another; as, the family separated.

Sep"a*rate (?), p. a. [L. separatus, p. p. ] 1. Divided from another or
others; disjoined; disconnected; separated; -- said of things once
connected.

    Him that was separate from his brethren.


Gen. xlix. 26.

2. Unconnected; not united or associated; distinct; -- said of things
that have not been connected.

    For such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
    undefiled, separate from sinnere.


Heb. vii. 26.

3. Disunited from the body; disembodied; as, a separate spirit; the
separate state of souls.

Separate estate (Law), an estate limited to a married woman independent
of her husband. -- Separate maintenance (Law), an allowance made to a
wife by her husband under deed of separation.

-- Sep"a*rate*ly, adv. -- Sep"a*rate*ness, n.

Sep`a*rat"ic*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to separatism in religion;
schismatical. [R.] Dr. T. Dwight.

Sep"a*ra`ting (?), a. Designed or employed to separate.

Separating funnel (Chem.), a funnel, often globe-shaped, provided with
a stopcock for the separate drawing off of immiscible liquids of
different specific gravities.

Sep`a*ra"tion (?), n. [L. separatio: cf. F. séparation.] The act of
separating, or the state of being separated, or separate. Specifically:
(a) Chemical analysis. (b) Divorce. (c) (Steam Boilers) The operation
of removing water from steam.

Judicial separation (Law), a form of divorce; a separation of man and
wife which has the effect of making each a single person for all legal
purposes but without ability to contract a new marriage. Mozley & W.

Sep"a*ra*tism (?), n. [CF. F. séparatisme.] The character or act of a
separatist; disposition to withdraw from a church; the practice of so
withdrawing.

Sep`a*ra*tist (?), n. [Cf. F. séparatiste.] One who withdraws or
separates himself; especially, one who withdraws from a church to which
he has belonged; a seceder from an established church; a dissenter; a
nonconformist; a schismatic; a sectary.

    Heavy fines on divines who should preach in any meeting of
    separatist .


Macaulay.

Sep`a*ra*tis"tic (?), a. Of or pertaining to separatists;
characterizing separatists; schismatical.

Sep"a*ra*tive (?), a. [L. separativus.] Causing, or being to cause,
separation. "Separative virtue of extreme cold." Boyle.

Sep"a*ra`tor (?), n. [L.] One who, or that which, separates.
Specifically: (a) (Steam Boilers) A device for depriving steam of
particles of water mixed with it. (b) (Mining) An apparatus for sorting
pulverized ores into grades, or separating them from gangue. (c)
(Weaving) An instrument used for spreading apart the threads of the
warp in the loom, etc.

Sep"a*ra*to*ry (?), a. Separative. Cheyne.

Sep"a*ra*to*ry, n. [Cf. F. séparatoire.] 1. (Chem.) An apparatus used
in separating, as a separating funnel.

2. (Surg.) A surgical instrument for separating the pericranium from
the cranium. [Obs.]

Sep`a*ra"trix (?), n.; pl. L. -trices (#), E. -trixes (#). [L., she
that separates.] (Arith.) The decimal point; the dot placed at the left
of a decimal fraction, to separate it from the whole number which it
follows. The term is sometimes also applied to other marks of
separation.

Se*pawn" (?), n. See Supawn. [Local, U.S.]

Sep"e*li*ble (?), a. [L. sepelibilis, fr. sepelire to bury.] Admitting
of burial. [Obs.] Bailey.

Sep`e*li"tion (?), n. Burial. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

Se"phen (?), n. (Zoöl.) A large sting ray of the genus Trygon,
especially T. sephen of the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea. The skin is
an article of commerce.

Se"pi*a (?), n.; pl. E. Sepias (#), L. Sepiæ (#). [L., fr. Gr.
&?;&?;&?; the cuttlefish, or squid.] 1. (Zoöl.) (a) The common European
cuttlefish. (b) A genus comprising the common cuttlefish and numerous
similar species. See Illustr. under Cuttlefish.

2. A pigment prepared from the ink, or black secretion, of the sepia,
or cuttlefish. Treated with caustic potash, it has a rich brown color;
and this mixed with a red forms Roman sepia. Cf. India ink, under
India.

Sepia drawing or picture, a drawing in monochrome, made in sepia alone,
or in sepia with other brown pigments.

Se"pi*a, a. Of a dark brown color, with a little red in its
composition; also, made of, or done in, sepia.

Se"pic (?), a. Of or pertaining to sepia; done in sepia; as, a sepic
drawing.

Sep`i*da"ceous (?), a. (Zoöl.) Like or pertaining to the cuttlefishes
of the genus Sepia.

Sep"i*ment (?), n. [L. sepimentum, saepimentum, from sepire, saepire,
to hedge in.] Something that separates; a hedge; a fence. [R.] Bailey.

Se"pi*o*lite` (?), n. [Septa + -lite.] (Min.) Meerschaum. See
Meerschaum.

Se"pi*o*stare` (?), n. [Sepia + Gr. &?;&?;&?; a bone.] (Zoöl.) The bone
or shell of cuttlefish. See Illust. under Cuttlefish.

Se*pon" (#), n. See Supawn. [Local, U.S.]

Se*pose" (?), v. t. [L. pref se- aside + E. pose.] To set apart. [Obs.]
Donne.

Se*pos"it (?), v. t. [L. sepositus, p. p. of seponere to set aside.] To
set aside; to give up. [Obs.]

Sep`o*si"tion (&?;), n. [L. sepositio.] The act of setting aside, or of
giving up. [Obs.] Jer. Taylor.

Se"poy (?), n. [Per. siph, fr. siph an army. Cf. Spahi.] A native of
India employed as a soldier in the service of a European power, esp. of
Great Britain; an Oriental soldier disciplined in the European manner.

||Sep*pu"ku (?), n. Same as Hara-kiri.

    Seppuku, or hara-kiri, also came into vogue.


W. E. Griffis.

Sep"sin (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; putrefaction.] (Physiol. Chem.) A
soluble poison (ptomaine) present in putrid blood. It is also formed in
the putrefaction of proteid matter in general.

||Sep"sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; putrefaction.] (Med.) The
||poisoning of the system by the introduction of putrescent material
||into the blood.

Sept (?), n. [A corruption of sect, n.] A clan, tribe, or family,
proceeding from a common progenitor; -- used especially of the ancient
clans in Ireland.

    The chief, struck by the illustration, asked at once to be
    baptized, and all his sept followed his example.


S. Lover.

||Sep*tæ"mi*a (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; putrid + &?;&?;&?;
||blood.] (Med.) Septicæmia.

Sep"tal (?), a. Of or pertaining to a septum or septa, as of a coral or
a shell.

Sep"tane (?), n. [L. septem seven.] (Chem.) See Heptane. [R.]

Sep"tan`gle (?), n. [Septi- + angle.] (Geom.) A figure which has seven
angles; a heptagon. [R.]

Sep*tan"gu*lar (?), a. Heptagonal.

||Sep*ta"ri*um (?), n.;pl. Septaria (#). [NL., fr. L. septum, saeptum,
||an inclosure, a partition, fr. sepire, saepire, to inclose.] (Geol.)
||A flattened concretionary nodule, usually of limestone, intersected
||within by cracks which are often filled with calcite, barite, or
||other minerals.

Sep"tate (?), a. [L. septum, saeptum, partition.] Divided by partition
or partitions; having septa; as, a septate pod or shell.

Sep*tem"ber (?), n. [L., fr. septem seven, as being the seventh month
of the Roman year, which began with March: cf. F. septembre. See
Seven.] The ninth month of the year, containing thurty days.

Sep*tem"ber*er (?), n. A Setembrist. Carlyle.

Sep*tem"brist (?), n. [F. septembriste.] An agent in the massacres in
Paris, committed in patriotic frenzy, on the 22d of September, 1792.

Sep*tem"flu*ous (?), a.[L. septemfluus; septem seven + fluere to flow.]
Flowing sevenfold; divided into seven streams or currents. [R.] Fuller.

Sep*tem"par*tite (?), a. [L. septem seven + E. partite.] Divided nearly
to the base into seven parts; as, a septempartite leaf.

Sep*tem"tri*oun (?), n. Septentrion. [Obs.]

||Sep*tem"vir (?), n.; pl. E. Septemvirs (#), L. Septemviri (#). [L.
||septemviri, pl.; septem seven + viri, pl. of vir man.] (Rom. Hist.)
||One of a board of seven men associated in some office.

Sep*tem"vi*rate (?), n.[L. septemviratus.] The office of septemvir; a
government by septimvirs.

Sep"ten*a*ry (?), a. [L. septenairus, from septeni seven each, septem
seven: cf. F. septénaire. See Seven. ] 1. Consisting of, or relating
to, seven; as, a septenary number. I. Watts.

2. Lasting seven years; continuing seven years. "Septenary penance."
Fuller.

Sep"ten*a*ry, n. The number seven. [R.] Holinshed.

Sep"ten*ate (?), a. [L. septeni seven each.] (Bot.) Having parts in
sevens; heptamerous.

Sep*ten"nate (?), n. [F. septennat.] A period of seven years; as, the
septennate during which the President of the French Republic holds
office.

Sep*ten"ni*al (?), a. [L. septennium a period of seven years; septem
seven + annus year. See Seven, and Annual.] 1. Lasting or continuing
seven years; as, septennial parliaments.

2. Happening or returning once in every seven years; as, septennial
elections in England.

Sep*ten"ni*al*ly, adv. Once in seven years.

Sep*ten"tri*al (?), a. Septentrional. Drayton.

||Sep*ten"tri*o (?), n. [L. See Septentrion.] (Astron.) The
||constellation Ursa Major.

Sep*ten"tri*on (?), n. [L. septentrio the northern regions, the north,
fr. septentriones the seven stars near the north pole, called Charles's
Wain, or the Great Bear, also those called the Little Bear; properly,
the seven plow oxen; septem seven + trio, orig., a plow ox: cf. F.
septentrion.] The north or northern regions. Shak.

    Both East West, South and Septentrioun.


Chaucer.

{ Sep*ten"tri*on (?), Sep*ten"tri*on*al (?), } a. [L. septentrionalis:
cf. F. septentrional.] Of or pertaining to the north; northern. "From
cold septentrion blasts." Milton.

Sep*ten`tri*on*al"i*ty (?), n. Northerliness.

Sep*ten"tri*on*al*ly (?), adv. Northerly.

Sep*ten"tri*on*ate (?), v. i. To tend or point toward the north; to
north. Sir T. Browne.

{ Sep*tet", Sep*tette" } (?), n. [From L. septem seven, like duet, from
L. duo.] 1. A set of seven persons or objects; as, a septet of singers.

2. (Mus.) A musical composition for seven instruments or seven voices;
-- called also septuor.

Sept"foil (?), n. [F. sept seven (L. septem) + E. foil leaf: cf. L.
septifolium.] 1. (Bot.) A European herb, the tormentil. See Tormentil.

2. (Arch.) An ornamental foliation having seven lobes. Cf. Cinquefoil,
Quarterfoil, and Trefoil.

3. (Eccl.Art.) A typical figure, consisting of seven equal segments of
a circle, used to denote the gifts of the Holy Chost, the seven
sacraments as recognized by the Roman Catholic Church, etc. [R.]

Sep"ti- (?), [L. septem seven.] A combining form meaning seven; as,
septifolious, seven-leaved; septi-lateral, seven-sided.

Sep"tic (?), a. [Septi- + - ic.] (Math.) Of the seventh degree or
order. -- n. (Alg.) A quantic of the seventh degree.

{ Sep"tic (?), Sep"tic*al (?), } a. [L. septicus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, fr.
&?;&?;&?;&?; to make putrid: cf. F. septique.] Having power to promote
putrefaction.

Sep"tic, n. A substance that promotes putrefaction.

||Sep`ti*cæ"mi*a (?), n. [NL., from Gr. &?;&?;&?; putrefactive +
||&?;&?;&?; blood.] (Med.) A poisoned condition of the blood produced
||by the absorption into it of septic or putrescent material; blood
||poisoning. It is marked by chills, fever, prostration, and
||inflammation of the different serous membranes and of the lungs,
||kidneys, and other organs.

Sep"tic*al*ly (?), adv. In a septic manner; in a manner tending to
promote putrefaction.

Sep"ti*ci`dal (?), a. [Septum + L. caedere to cut: cf. F. septicide.]
(Bot.) Dividing the partitions; -- said of a method of dehiscence in
which a pod splits through the partitions and is divided into its
component carpels.

Sep*tic"i*ty (?), n. [See Septic.] Tendency to putrefaction; septic
quality.

Sep`ti*fa"ri*ous (?), a. [L. septifariam sevenfold. Cf. Bifarious.]
(Bot.) Turned in seven different ways.

Sep*tif"er*ous (?), a. [Septum + -ferous: cf. F. septifère.] (Bot.)
Bearing a partition; -- said of the valves of a capsule.

Sep*tif"er*ous, a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; putrefied + -ferous.] Conveying
putrid poison; as, the virulence of septiferous matter.

Sep*tif"lu*ous (?), a. [CF. Septemfluous.] Flowing in seven streams;
septemfluous.

Sep`ti*fo"li*ous (?), a. [Septi- + L. folium leaf.] (Bot.) Having seven
leaves.

Sep"ti*form (?), a. [Septum + -form.] Having the form of a septum.

Sep*tif"ra*gal (?), a. [Septum + L. frangere, fractum, to break.]
(Bot.) Breaking from the partitions; -- said of a method of dehiscence
in which the valves of a pod break away from the partitions, and these
remain attached to the common axis.

Sep`ti*lat"er*al (?), a. [Septi- + lateral.] Having seven sides; as, a
septilateral figure.

Sep*til"lion (?), n. [F. septilion, formed fr. L. septem seven, in
imitation of million.] According to the French method of numeration
(which is followed also in the United States), the number expressed by
a unit with twenty-four ciphers annexed. According to the English
method, the number expressed by a unit with forty-two ciphers annexed.
See Numeration.

Sep"ti*mole (?), n. [L. septem seven.] (Mus.) A group of seven notes to
be played in the time of four or six.

Sep*tin"su*lar (?), a. [Septi- + insular.] Consisting of seven islands;
as, the septinsular republic of the Ionian Isles.

Sep"ti*syl`la*ble (?), n. [Septi- + syllable.] A word of seven
syllables.

Sep*to"ic (?), a. [L. septem seven.] (Chem.) See Heptoic. [R.]

Sep`to*max"il*la*ry (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the nasal
septum and the maxilla; situated in the region of these parts. -- n. A
small bone between the nasal septum and the maxilla in many reptiles
and amphibians.

Sep`tu*a*ge*na"ri*an (?), n. A person who is seventy years of age; a
septuagenary.

Sep`tu*ag"e*na*ry (?), a. [L. septuagenarius, fr. septuageny seventy
each; akin to septuaginta seventy, septem seven. See Seven.] Consisting
of seventy; also, seventy years old. -- n. A septuagenarian.

||Sep`tu*a*ges"i*ma (?), n. [NL., fr. L. septuagesimus the seventieth,
||fr. septuaginta seventy.] (Eccl.) The third Sunday before Lent; -- so
||called because it is about seventy days before Easter.

<! p. 1313 !>

Sep`tu*a*ges"i*mal (?), a. Consisting of seventy days, years, etc.;
reckoned by seventies.

    Our abridged and septuagesimal age.


Sir T. Browne.

Sep"tu*a*gint (?), n. [From L. septuaginta seventy.] A Greek version of
the Old Testament; -- so called because it was believed to be the work
of seventy (or rather of seventy-two) translators.

The causes which produced it [the Septuagint], the number and names of
the translators, the times at which different portions were translated,
are all uncertain. The only point in which all agree is that Alexandria
was the birthplace of the version. On one other point there is a near
agreement, namely, as to time, that the version was made, or at least
commenced, in the time of the early Ptolemies, in the first half of the
third century b.c. Dr. W. Smith (Bib. Dict.)

Septuagint chronology, the chronology founded upon the dates of the
Septuagint, which makes 1500 years more from the creation to Abraham
than the Hebrew Bible.

Sep"tu*a*ry (?), n. [L. septem seven.] Something composed of seven; a
week. [R.] Ash.

Sep"tu*late (?), a. [Dim. fr. septum.] (Bot.) Having imperfect or
spurious septa.

||Sep"tu*lum (?), n.; pl. Septula (#). [NL., dim. of L. septum septum.]
||(Anat.) A little septum; a division between small cavities or parts.

||Sep"tum (?), n.; pl. Septa (#). [L. septum, saeptum, an inclosure,
||hedge, fence, fr. sepire, saepire, to hedge in, inclose.] 1. A wall
||separating two cavities; a partition; as, the nasal septum.

2. (Bot.) A partition that separates the cells of a fruit.

3. (Zoöl.) (a) One of the radial calcareous plates of a coral. (b) One
of the transverse partitions dividing the shell of a mollusk, or of a
rhizopod, into several chambers. See Illust. under Nautilus. (c) One of
the transverse partitions dividing the body cavity of an annelid.

Sep"tu*or (?), n. [F.] (Mus.) A septet.

Sep"tu*ple (?), a. [LL. septuplus; cf. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?;:cf. F.
septuple. Cf. Double, Quadruple.] Seven times as much; multiplied by
seven; sevenfold.

Sep"tu*ple, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Septupled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Septupling (?).] To multiply by seven; to make sevenfold. Sir J.
Herschel.

{ Sep"ul*cher, Sep"ul*chre } (?), n. [OE. sepulcre, OF. sepulcre, F.
sépulcre, fr. L. sepulcrum, sepulchrum, fr. sepelire to bury.] The
place in which the dead body of a human being is interred, or a place
set apart for that purpose; a grave; a tomb.

    The stony entrance of this sepulcher.


Shak.

    The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was
    yet dark, unto the sepulcher.


John xx. 1.

A whited sepulcher. Fig.: Any person who is fair outwardly but unclean
or vile within. See Matt. xxiii. 27.

{ Sep"ul*cher, Sep"ul*chre } (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sepulchered (?)
or Sepulchred (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Sepulchering (?) or Sepulchring
(&?;).] To bury; to inter; to entomb; as, obscurely sepulchered.

    And so sepulchered in such pomp dost lie That kings for such a tomb
    would wish to die.


Milton.

Se*pul"chral (?), a. [L. sepulcralis: cf. F. sépulcral.] 1. Of or
pertaining to burial, to the grave, or to monuments erected to the
memory of the dead; as, a sepulchral stone; a sepulchral inscription.

2. Unnaturally low and grave; hollow in tone; -- said of sound,
especially of the voice.

    This exaggerated dulling of the voice . . . giving what is commonly
    called a sepulchral tone.


H. Sweet.

Sep"ul*ture (?), n. [F. sépulture, L. sepultura, fr. sepelire,
sepultum, to bury.] 1. The act of depositing the dead body of a human
being in the grave; burial; interment.

    Where we may royal sepulture prepare.


Dryden.

2. A sepulcher; a grave; a place of burial.

    Drunkeness that is the horrible sepulture of man's reason.


Chaucer.

Se*qua"cious (?), a. [L. sequax, -acis, fr. suquit to follow. See Sue
to follow. ] 1. Inclined to follow a leader; following; attendant.

    Trees uprooted left their place, Sequacious of the lyre.


Dryden.

2. Hence, ductile; malleable; pliant; manageable.

    In the greater bodies the forge was easy, the matter being ductile
    and sequacious.


Ray.

3. Having or observing logical sequence; logically consistent and
rigorous; consecutive in development or transition of thought.

    The scheme of pantheistic omniscience so prevalent among the
    sequacious thinkers of the day.


Sir W. Hamilton.

    Milton was not an extensive or discursive thinker, as Shakespeare
    was; for the motions of his mind were slow, solemn, and sequacious,
    like those of the planets.


De Quincey.

Se*qua"cious*ness, n. Quality of being sequacious.

Se*quac"i*ty (?), n. [L. sequacitas.] Quality or state of being
sequacious; sequaciousness. Bacon.

Se"quel (s"kwl), n. [L. sequela, fr. sequit to follow: cf. F. séquelle
a following. See Sue to follow.] 1. That which follows; a succeeding
part; continuation; as, the sequel of a man's advantures or history.

    O, let me say no more! Gather the sequel by that went before.


Shak.

2. Consequence; event; effect; result; as, let the sun cease, fail, or
swerve, and the sequel would be ruin.

3. Conclusion; inference. [R.] Whitgift.

||Se*que"la (?), n.; pl. Sequelæ (#). [L., a follower, a result, from
||sequit to follow.] One who, or that which, follows. Specifically: (a)
||An adherent, or a band or sect of adherents. "Coleridge and his
||sequela." G. P. Marsh. (b) That which follows as the logical result
||of reasoning; inference; conclusion; suggestion.

    Sequelæ, or thoughts suggested by the preceding aphorisms.


Coleridge.

(c) (Med.) A morbid phenomenon left as the result of a disease; a
disease resulting from another.

Se"quence (s"kwens), n. [F. séquence, L. sequentia, fr. sequens. See
Sequent.] 1. The state of being sequent; succession; order of
following; arrangement.

    How art thou a king But by fair sequence and succession?


Shak.

    Sequence and series of the seasons of the year.


Bacon.

2. That which follows or succeeds as an effect; sequel; consequence;
result.

    The inevitable sequences of sin and punishment.


Bp. Hall.

3. (Philos.) Simple succession, or the coming after in time, without
asserting or implying causative energy; as, the reactions of chemical
agents may be conceived as merely invariable sequences.

4. (Mus.) (a) Any succession of chords (or harmonic phrase) rising or
falling by the regular diatonic degrees in the same scale; a succession
of similar harmonic steps. (b) A melodic phrase or passage successively
repeated one tone higher; a rosalia.

5. (R.C.Ch.) A hymn introduced in the Mass on certain festival days,
and recited or sung immediately before the gospel, and after the
gradual or introit, whence the name. Bp. Fitzpatrick.

    Originally the sequence was called a Prose, because its early form
    was rhythmical prose.


Shipley.

6. (Card Playing) (a) (Whist) Three or more cards of the same suit in
immediately consecutive order of value; as, ace, king, and queen; or
knave, ten, nine, and eight. (b) (Poker) All five cards, of a hand, in
consecutive order as to value, but not necessarily of the same suit;
when of one suit, it is called a sequence flush.

Se"quent (?), a. [L. sequens, -entis, p. pr. of sequi to follow. See
Sue to follow.] 1. Following; succeeding; in continuance.

    What to this was sequent Thou knowest already.


Shak.

2. Following as an effect; consequent.

Se"quent, n. 1. A follower. [R.] Shak.

2. That which follows as a result; a sequence.

Se*quen"tial (?), a. Succeeding or following in order. --
Se*quen"tial*ly, adv.

Se*ques"ter (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sequestered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sequestering.] [F. séquestrer, L. sequestrare to give up for safe
keeping, from sequester a depositary or trustee in whose hands the
thing contested was placed until the dispute was settled. Cf.
Sequestrate.] 1. (Law) To separate from the owner for a time; to take
from parties in controversy and put into the possession of an
indifferent person; to seize or take possession of, as property
belonging to another, and hold it till the profits have paid the demand
for which it is taken, or till the owner has performed the decree of
court, or clears himself of contempt; in international law, to
confiscate.

    Formerly the goods of a defendant in chancery were, in the last
    resort, sequestered and detained to enforce the decrees of the
    court. And now the profits of a benefice are sequestered to pay the
    debts of ecclesiastics.


Blackstone.

2. To cause (one) to submit to the process of sequestration; to deprive
(one) of one's estate, property, etc.

    It was his tailor and his cook, his fine fashions and his French
    ragouts, which sequestered him.


South.

3. To set apart; to put aside; to remove; to separate from other
things.

    I had wholly sequestered my civil affairss.


Bacon.

4. To cause to retire or withdraw into obscurity; to seclude; to
withdraw; -- often used reflexively.

    When men most sequester themselves from action.


Hooker.

    A love and desire to sequester a man's self for a higher
    conversation.


Bacon.

Se*ques"ter, v. i. 1. To withdraw; to retire. [Obs.]

    To sequester out of the world into Atlantic and Utopian politics.


Milton.

2. (Law) To renounce (as a widow may) any concern with the estate of
her husband.

Se*ques"ter, n. 1. Sequestration; separation. [R.]

2. (Law) A person with whom two or more contending parties deposit the
subject matter of the controversy; one who mediates between two
parties; a mediator; an umpire or referee. Bouvier.

3. (Med.) Same as Sequestrum.

Se*ques"tered (?), a. Retired; secluded. "Sequestered scenes." Cowper.

    Along the cool, sequestered vale of life.


Gray.

Se*ques"tra*ble (?), a. Capable of being sequestered; subject or liable
to sequestration.

Se*ques"tral (?), a. (Med.) Of or pertaining to a sequestrum. Quian.

Se*ques"trate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sequestrated; p. pr. & vb. n.
Sequestrating.] To sequester.

Seq`ues*tra"tion (?), n. [L. sequestratio: cf. F. séquestration.] 1.
(a) (Civil & Com. Law) The act of separating, or setting aside, a thing
in controversy from the possession of both the parties that contend for
it, to be delivered to the one adjudged entitled to it. It may be
voluntary or involuntary. (b) (Chancery) A prerogative process
empowering certain commissioners to take and hold a defendant's
property and receive the rents and profits thereof, until he clears
himself of a contempt or performs a decree of the court. (c) (Eccl.
Law) A kind of execution for a rent, as in the case of a beneficed
clerk, of the profits of a benefice, till he shall have satisfied some
debt established by decree; the gathering up of the fruits of a
benefice during a vacancy, for the use of the next incumbent; the
disposing of the goods, by the ordinary, of one who is dead, whose
estate no man will meddle with. Craig. Tomlins. Wharton. (d) (Internat.
Law) The seizure of the property of an individual for the use of the
state; particularly applied to the seizure, by a belligerent power, of
debts due from its subjects to the enemy. Burrill.

2. The state of being separated or set aside; separation; retirement;
seclusion from society.

    Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign, . . . This loathsome
    sequestration have I had.


Shak.

3. Disunion; disjunction. [Obs.] Boyle.

Seq"ues*tra`tor (?), n. [L., one that hinders or impedes.] (Law) (a)
One who sequesters property, or takes the possession of it for a time,
to satisfy a demand out of its rents or profits. (b) One to whom the
keeping of sequestered property is committed.

||Se*ques"trum (?), n.; pl. Sequestra (#). [NL. See Sequester.] (Med.)
||A portion of dead bone which becomes separated from the sound
||portion, as in necrosis.

Se"quin (?), n. [F. sequin, It. zecchino, from zecca the mint, fr. Ar.
sekkah, sikkah, a die, a stamp. Cf. Zechin.] An old gold coin of Italy
and Turkey. It was first struck at Venice about the end of the 13th
century, and afterward in the other Italian cities, and by the Levant
trade was introduced into Turkey. It is worth about 9s. 3d. sterling,
or about $2.25. The different kinds vary somewhat in value. [Written
also chequin, and zequin.]

Se*quoi"a (?), n. [NL. So called by Dr. Endlicher in honor of Sequoyah,
who invented the Cherokee alphabet.] (Bot.) A genus of coniferous
trees, consisting of two species, Sequoia Washingtoniana, syn. S.
gigantea, the "big tree" of California, and S. sempervirens, the
redwood, both of which attain an immense height.

Se*quoi"ëne (?), n. (Chem.) A hydrocarbon (C13H10) obtained in white
fluorescent crystals, in the distillation products of the needles of
the California "big tree" (Sequoia gigantea).

Se*ragl"io (?), n. [It. serraglio, originally, an inclosure of
palisades, afterwards also, a palace, seraglio (by confusion with Per.
serïa a palace, an entirely different word), fr. serrare to shut, fr.
LL. serra a bar for fastening doors, L. sera. See Serry, Series.] 1. An
inclosure; a place of separation. [Obs.]

    I went to the Ghetto, where the Jews dwell as in a suburb, by
    themselves. I passed by the piazza Judea, where their seraglio
    begins.


Evelyn.

2. The palace of the Grand Seignior, or Turkish sultan, at
Constantinople, inhabited by the sultan himself, and all the officers
and dependents of his court. In it are also kept the females of the
harem.

3. A harem; a place for keeping wives or concubines; sometimes,
loosely, a place of licentious pleasure; a house of debauchery.

||Se*ra"i (?), n. [Per. serï, or sarï, a palace, a king's court, a
||seraglio, an inn. Cf. Caravansary.] A palace; a seraglio; also, in
||the East, a place for the accommodation of travelers; a caravansary,
||or rest house.

Ser`al*bu"men (?), n. (Physiol. CHem.) Serum albumin.

||Se*rang" (?), n. [Per. sarhang a commander.] The boatswain of a
||Lascar or East Ondian crew.

||Se*ra"pe (?), n. [Sp. Amer. sarape.] A blanket or shawl worn as an
||outer garment by the Spanish Americans, as in Mexico.

Ser"aph (?), n.; pl. E. Seraphs (#), Heb. Seraphim (#). [Heb. serphim,
pl.] One of an order of celestial beings, each having three pairs of
wings. In ecclesiastical art and in poetry, a seraph is represented as
one of a class of angels. Isa. vi. 2.

    As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns, As the rapt seraph
    that adores and burns.


Pope.

Seraph moth (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of geometrid moths of
the genus Lobophora, having the hind wings deeply bilobed, so that they
seem to have six wings.

{ Se*raph"ic (?), Se*raph"ic*al (?), } a. [Cf. F. séraphique.] Of or
pertaining to a seraph; becoming, or suitable to, a seraph; angelic;
sublime; pure; refined. "Seraphic arms and trophies." Milton.
"Seraphical fervor." Jer. Taylor. -- Se*raph"ic*al*ly, adv. --
Se*raph"ic*al*ness, n.

Se*raph"i*cism (?), n. The character, quality, or state of a seraph;
seraphicalness. [R.] Cudworth.

Ser"a*phim (?), n. The Hebrew plural of Seraph. Cf. Cherubim.

The double plural form seraphims is sometimes used, as in the King
James version of the Bible, Isa. vi. 2 and 6.

<! p. 1314 !>

Ser`a*phi"na (?), n. [NL.] A seraphine.

Ser"a*phine (?), n. [From Seraph.] (Mus.) A wind instrument whose
sounding parts are reeds, consisting of a thin tongue of brass playing
freely through a slot in a plate. It has a case, like a piano, and is
played by means of a similar keybord, the bellows being worked by the
foot. The melodeon is a portable variety of this instrument.

||Se*ra"pis (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;.] (Myth.) An
||Egyptian deity, at first a symbol of the Nile, and so of fertility;
||later, one of the divinities of the lower world. His worship was
||introduced into Greece and Rome.

Se*ras"kier (?), n. [Turk., fr. Per. ser head, chief + Ar. 'asker an
army.] A general or commander of land forces in the Turkish empire;
especially, the commander-in-chief of minister of war.

Se*ras"kier*ate (?), n. The office or authority of a seraskier.

Ser*bo"ni*an (?), a. Relating to the lake of Serbonis in Egypt, which
by reason of the sand blowing into it had a deceptive appearance of
being solid land, but was a bog.

    A gulf profound as that Serbonian bog . . . Where armies whole have
    sunk.


Milton.

Sere (?), a. Dry; withered. Same as Sear.

    But with its sound it shook the sails That were so thin and sere.


Coleridge.

Sere, n. [F. serre.] Claw; talon. [Obs.] Chapman.

||Se*rein" (?), n. [F. Cf. Serenade, n.] (Meteorol.) A mist, or very
||fine rain, which sometimes falls from a clear sky a few moments after
||sunset. Tyndall.

Ser`e*nade" (?), n. [F. sérénade, It. serenata, probably fr. L. serenus
serene (cf. Serene), misunderstood as a derivative fr. L. serus late.
Cf. Soirée.] (Mus.) (a) Music sung or performed in the open air at
nights; -- usually applied to musical entertainments given in the open
air at night, especially by gentlemen, in a spirit of gallantry, under
the windows of ladies. (b) A piece of music suitable to be performed at
such times.

Ser`e*nade", v. t. [imp. & p. p. Serenaded; p. pr. & vb. n.
Serenading.] To entertain with a serenade.

Ser`e*nade", v. i. To perform a serenade.

Ser`e*nad"er (?), n. One who serenades.

{ Ser`e*na"ta (?), Ser"e*nate (?), } n. [It. serenata. See Serenade.]
(Mus.) A piece of vocal music, especially one on an amoreus subject; a
serenade.

    Or serenate, which the starved lover sings To his pround fair.


Milton.

The name serenata was given by Italian composers in the time of Handel,
and by Handel himself, to a cantata of a pastoreal of dramatic
character, to a secular ode, etc.; also by Mozart and others to an
orchectral composition, in several movements, midway between the suite
of an earlier period and the modern symphony. Grove.

Se*rene" (?), a. [L. serenus to grow dry, Gr. &?;&?;&?; hot,
scorching.] 1. Bright; clear; unabscured; as, a serene sky.

    The moon serene in glory mounts the sky.


Pope.

    Full many a gem of purest ray serene The dark unfathomed caves of
    ocean bear.


Gray.

2. Calm; placid; undisturbed; unruffled; as, a serene aspect; a serene
soul. Milton.

In several countries of Europe, Serene is given as a tittle to princes
and the members of their families; as, His Serene Highness.

Drop serene. (Med.) See Amaurosis. Milton.

Se*rene", n. 1. Serenity; clearness; calmness. [Poetic.] "The serene of
heaven." Southey.

    To their master is denied To share their sweet serene.


Young.

2. [F. serein evening dew or damp. See Serein.] Evening air; night
chill. [Obs.] "Some serene blast me." B. Jonson.

Se*rene", v. t. [L. serenare.] To make serene.

    Heaven and earth, as if contending, vie To raise his being, and
    serene his soul.


Thomson.

Se*rene"ly, adv. 1. In a serene manner; clearly.

    Now setting Phœbus shone serenely bright.


Pope.

2. With unruffled temper; coolly; calmly. Prior.

Se*rene"ness, n. Serenity. Feltham.

Se*ren"i*tude (?), n. Serenity. [Obs.]

Se*ren"i*ty (?), n. [L. serenuas: cf. F. sérénité.] 1. The quality or
state of being serene; clearness and calmness; quietness; stillness;
peace.

    A general peace and serenity newly succeeded a general trouble.


Sir W. Temple.

2. Calmness of mind; eveness of temper; undisturbed state; coolness;
composure.

    I can not see how any men should ever transgress those moral rules
    with confidence and serenity.


Locke.

Serenity is given as a title to the members of certain princely
families in Europe; as, Your Serenity.

Serf (?), n. [F., fr. L. serus servant, slave; akin to servare to
protect, preserve, observe, and perhaps originally, a client, a man
under one's protection. Cf. Serve, v. t.] A servant or slave employed
in husbandry, and in some countries attached to the soil and
transferred with it, as formerly in Russia.

    In England, at least from the reign of Henry II, one only, and that
    the inferior species [of villeins], existed . . . But by the
    customs of France and Germany, persons in this abject state seem to
    have been called serfs, and distinguished from villeins, who were
    only bound to fixed payments and duties in respect of their lord,
    though, as it seems, without any legal redress if injured by him.


Hallam.

Syn. -- Serf, Slave. A slave is the absolute property of his master,
and may be sold in any way. A serf, according to the strict sense of
the term, is one bound to work on a certain estate, and thus attached
to the soil, and sold with it into the service of whoever purchases the
land.

{ Serf"age (?), Serf"dom (?) }, n. The state or condition of a serf.

Serf"hood (?), Serf"ism (&?;), n. Serfage.

Serge (?), n. [F. serge, sarge, originally, a silken stuff, fr. L.
serica, f. or neut. pl. of sericus silken. See Sericeous, Silk.] A
woolen twilled stuff, much used as material for clothing for both
sexes.

Silk serge, a twilled silk fabric used mostly by tailors for lining
parts of gentlemen's coats.

Serge, n. [F. cierge.] A large wax candle used in the ceremonies of
various churches.

Ser"gean*cy (?), n.; pl. Sergeancies (#). [Cf. Sergeanty.] The office
of a sergeant; sergeantship. [Written also serjeancy.]

Ser"geant (?), n. [F. sergent, fr. L. serviens, -entis, p. pr. of
servire to serve. See Serve, and cf. Servant.] [Written also serjeant.
Both spellings are authorized. In England serjeant is usually
preferred, except for military officers. In the United States sergeant
is common for civil officers also.] 1. Formerly, in England, an officer
nearly answering to the more modern bailiff of the hundred; also, an
officer whose duty was to attend on the king, and on the lord high
steward in court, to arrest traitors and other offenders. He is now
called sergeant-at-arms, and two of these officers, by allowance of the
sovereign, attend on the houses of Parliament (one for each house) to
execute their commands, and another attends the Court Chancery.

    The sergeant of the town of Rome them sought.


Chaucer.

    The magistrates sent the serjeant, saying, Let those men go.


Acts xvi. 35.

    This fell sergeant, Death, Is strict in his arrest.


Shak.

2. (Mil.) In a company, battery, or troop, a noncommissioned officer
next in rank above a corporal, whose duty is to instruct recruits in
discipline, to form the ranks, etc.

In the United States service, besides the sergeants belonging to the
companies there are, in each regiment, a sergeant major, who is the
chief noncommissioned officer, and has important duties as the
assistant to the adjutant; a quartermaster sergeant, who assists the
quartermaster; a color sergeant, who carries the colors; and a
commissary sergeant, who assists in the care and distribution of the
stores. Ordnance sergeants have charge of the ammunition at military
posts.

3. (Law) A lawyer of the highest rank, answering to the doctor of the
civil law; -- called also serjeant at law. [Eng.] Blackstone.

4. A title sometimes given to the servants of the sovereign; as,
sergeant surgeon, that is, a servant, or attendant, surgeon. [Eng.]

5. (Zoöl.) The cobia.

Drill sergeant. (Mil.) See under Drill. -- Sergeant-at-arms, an officer
of a legislative body, or of a deliberative or judicial assembly, who
executes commands in preserving order and arresting offenders. See
Sergeant, 1. -- Sergeant major. (a) (Mil.) See the Note under def. 2,
above. (b) (Zoöl.) The cow pilot.

Ser"geant*cy (?), n. Same as Sergeancy.

Ser"geant*ry (?), n. [CF. OF. sergenteric.] See Sergeanty. [R.]
[Written also serjeantry.]

Ser"geant*ship, n. The office of sergeant.

Ser"geant*y (?), n. [Cf. OF. sergentie, LL. sergentia. See Sergeant.]
(Eng. Law) Tenure of lands of the crown by an honorary kind of service
not due to any lord, but to the king only. [Written also serjeanty.]

Grand sergeanty, a particular kind of tenure by which the tenant was
bound to do some special honorary service to the king in person, as to
carry his banner, his sword, or the like. Tomlins. Cowell. Blackstone.
-- Petit sergeanty. See under Petit.

Se"ri*al (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a series; consisting of a
series; appearing in successive parts or numbers; as, a serial work or
publication. "Classification . . . may be more or less serial." H.
Spencer.

2. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to rows. Gray.

Serial homology. (Biol.) See under Homology. -- Serial symmetry.
(Biol.) See under Symmetry.

Se"ri*al, n. A publication appearing in a series or succession of part;
a tale, or other writing, published in successive numbers of a
periodical.

Se`ri*al"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of succession in a series;
sequence. H. Spenser.

Se"ri*al*ly, adv. In a series, or regular order; in a serial manner;
as, arranged serially; published serially.

Se"ri*ate (?), a. Arranged in a series or succession; pertaining to a
series. -- Se"ri*ate*ly, adv.

Se`ri*a"tim (?), adv. [NL.] In regular order; one after the other;
severally.

Se`ri*a"tion (?), n. (Chem.) Arrangement or position in a series.

Se*ri"ceous (?), a. [L. sericus silken, sericum Seric stuff, silk, fr.
Sericus belonging to the Seres, Gr. &?;&?;&?;, a people of Eastern
Asia, the modern Chinese, celebrated for their silken fabrics. Cf.
Silk, Serge a woolen stuff.] 1. Of or pertaining to silk; consisting of
silk; silky.

2. (Bot.) Covered with very soft hairs pressed close to the surface;
as, a sericeous leaf.

3. (Zoöl.) Having a silklike luster, usually due to fine, close hairs.

Ser"i*cin (?), n. [L. sericus silken.] (Chem.) A gelatinous nitrogenous
material extracted from crude silk and other similar fiber by boiling
water; -- called also silk gelatin.

Ser"i*cite (?), n. [L. sericus silken.] (Min.) A kind of muscovite
occuring in silky scales having a fibrous structure. It is
characteristic of sericite schist.

||Ser`ic*te"ri*um (?), n. [See Sericeous.] (Zoöl.) A silk gland, as in
||the silkworms.

Ser"i*cul`ture (?), n. [See Sericeous, and Culture.] The raising of
silkworms.

Se"rie (?), n. [Cf. F. série.] Series. [Obs.]

||Ser`i*e"ma (?), n. [Native name.] (Zoöl.) A large South American bird
||(Dicholophus, or Cariama cristata) related to the cranes. It is often
||domesticated. Called also cariama.

Se"ries (?), n. [L. series, fr. serere, sertum, to join or bind
together; cf. Gr. &?;&?;&?; to fasten, Skr. sarit thread. Cf. Assert,
Desert a solitude, Exert, Insert, Seraglio.] 1. A number of things or
events standing or succeeding in order, and connected by a like
relation; sequence; order; course; a succession of things; as, a
continuous series of calamitous events.

    During some years his life a series of triumphs.


Macaulay.

2. (Biol.) Any comprehensive group of animals or plants including
several subordinate related groups.

Sometimes a series includes several classes; sometimes only orders or
families; in other cases only species.

3. (Math.) An indefinite number of terms succeeding one another, each
of which is derived from one or more of the preceding by a fixed law,
called the law of the series; as, an arithmetical series; a geometrical
series.

Ser"in (?), n. [F. serin.] (Zoöl.) A European finch (Serinus
hortulanus) closely related to the canary.

Ser"ine (?), n. [L. sericus silken.] (Chem.) A white crystalline
nitrogenous substance obtained by the action of dilute sulphuric acid
on silk gelatin.

{ Se`ri*o-com"ic (?), Se`ri*o-com"ic*al (?), } a. Having a mixture of
seriousness and sport; serious and comical.

Se"ri*ous (?), a. [L. serius: cf. F. sérieux, LL. seriosus.] 1. Grave
in manner or disposition; earnest; thoughtful; solemn; not light, gay,
or volatile.

    He is always serious, yet there is about his manner a graceful
    ease.


Macaulay.

2. Really intending what is said; being in earnest; not jesting or
deceiving. Beaconsfield.

3. Important; weighty; not trifling; grave.

    The holy Scriptures bring to our ears the most serious things in
    the world.


Young.

4. Hence, giving rise to apprehension; attended with danger; as, a
serious injury.

Syn. -- Grave; solemn; earnest; sedate; important; weighty. See Grave.

-- Se"ri*ous*ly, adv. -- Se"ri*ous*ness, n.

Ser"iph (?), n. (Type Founding) See Ceriph.

{ Ser"jeant (?), Ser"jeant*cy, etc. } See Sergeant, Sergeantcy, etc.

Serjeant-at-arms. See Sergeant-at- arms, under Sergeant.

Ser*moc`i*na"tion (?), n. [L. sermocinatio. See Sermon.] The making of
speeches or sermons; sermonizing. [Obs.] Peacham.

Ser*moc"i*na`tor (?), n. [L.] One who makes sermons or speeches. [Obs.]
Howell.

Ser"mon (?), n. [OE. sermoun, sermun, F. sermon, fr. L. sermo, -onis, a
speaking, discourse, probably fr. serer, sertum, to join, connect;
hence, a connected speech. See Series.] 1. A discourse or address; a
talk; a writing; as, the sermons of Chaucer. [Obs.] Chaucer.

2. Specifically, a discourse delivered in public, usually by a
clergyman, for the purpose of religious instruction and grounded on
some text or passage of Scripture.

    This our life exempt from public haunts Finds tongues in trees,
    books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones and good in
    everything.


Shak.

    His preaching much, but more his practice, wrought, A living sermon
    of the truths he taught.


Dryden.

3. Hence, a serious address; a lecture on one's conduct or duty; an
exhortation or reproof; a homily; -- often in a depreciatory sense.

Ser"mon, v. i. [Cf. OF. sermoner, F. sermonner to lecture one.] To
speak; to discourse; to compose or deliver a sermon. [Obs.] Holinshed.

    What needeth it to sermon of it more?


Chaucer.

Ser"mon, v. t. 1. To discourse to or of, as in a sermon. [Obs.]
Spenser.

2. To tutor; to lecture. [Poetic] Shak.

Ser`mon*eer" (?), n. A sermonizer. B. Jonson.

Ser"mon*er (?), n. A preacher; a sermonizer. [Derogative or Jocose.]
Thackeray.

Ser`mon*et" (?), n. A short sermon. [Written also sermonette.]

{ Ser*mon"ic (?), Ser*mon"ic*al (?), } a. Like, or appropriate to, a
sermon; grave and didactic. [R.] "Conversation . . . satirical or
sermonic." Prof. Wilson. "Sermonical style." V. Knox.

Ser"mon*ing (?), n. The act of discoursing; discourse; instruction;
preaching. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Ser"mon*ish, a. Resembling a sermon. [R.]

Ser"mon*ist, n. See Sermonizer.

Ser"mon*ize (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sermonized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sermonizing (?).] 1. To compose or write a sermon or sermons; to
preach.

2. To inculcate rigid rules. [R.] Chesterfield.

Ser"mon*ize, v. t. To preach or discourse to; to affect or influence by
means of a sermon or of sermons. [R.]

    Which of us shall sing or sermonize the other fast asleep?


Landor.

Ser"mon*i`zer (?), n. One who sermonizes.

Ser"o*lin (?), n. [Serum + L. oleum oil.] (Physiol. Chem.) (a) A
peculiar fatty substance found in the blood, probably a mixture of
fats, cholesterin, etc. (b) A body found in fecal matter and thought to
be formed in the intestines from the cholesterin of the bile; -- called
also stercorin, and stercolin.

<! p. 1315 !>

{ Se*ron" (?), Se*roon" (?), } n. [Sp. seron a kind of hamper or
pannier, aug. of sera a large pannier or basket.] Same as Ceroon.

This word as expressing a quantity or weight has no definite
signification. McElrath.

Se"rose` (?), a. Serous. [Obs.] Dr. H. More.

Se*ros"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. serosité. See Serous.] 1. The quality or
state of being serous.

2. (Physiol.) A thin watery animal fluid, as synovial fluid and
pericardial fluid.

Ser"o*tine (?), n. [F. sérotine, fr. L. serotinus that comes or happens
late.] (Zoöl.) The European long-eared bat (Vesperugo serotinus).

Se*rot"i*nous (?), a. [L. serotinus, fr. serus late.] (Biol.) Appearing
or blossoming later in the season than is customary with allied
species.

Se"rous (?), a. [Cf. F. séreux. See Serum.] (Physiol.) (a) Thin;
watery; like serum; as the serous fluids. (b) Of or pertaining to
serum; as, the serous glands, membranes, layers. See Serum.

Serous membrane. (Anat.) See under Membrane.

{ Ser"ow (?), Sur"row (?), } n. (Zoöl.) The thar.

||Ser"pens (?), n. [L. See Serpent.] (Astron.) A constellation
||represented as a serpent held by Serpentarius.

Ser"pent (?), n. [F., fr. L. serpens, -entis (sc. bestia), fr. serpens,
p. pr. of serpere to creep; akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?;, Skr. sarp, and
perhaps to L. repere, E. reptile. Cf. Herpes.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any reptile
of the order Ophidia; a snake, especially a large snake. See Illust.
under Ophidia.

The serpents are mostly long and slender, and move partly by bending
the body into undulations or folds and pressing them against objects,
and partly by using the free edges of their ventral scales to cling to
rough surfaces. Many species glide swiftly over the ground, some burrow
in the earth, others live in trees. A few are entirely aquatic, and
swim rapidly. See Ophidia, and Fang.

2. Fig.: A subtle, treacherous, malicious person.

3. A species of firework having a serpentine motion as it passess
through the air or along the ground.

4. (Astron.) The constellation Serpens.

5. (Mus.) A bass wind instrument, of a loud and coarse tone, formerly
much used in military bands, and sometimes introduced into the
orchestra; -- so called from its form.

Pharaoh's serpent (Chem.), mercuric sulphocyanate, a combustible white
substance which in burning gives off a poisonous vapor and leaves a
peculiar brown voluminous residue which is expelled in a serpentine
from. It is employed as a scientific toy. -- Serpent cucumber (Bot.),
the long, slender, serpentine fruit of the cucurbitaceous plant
Trichosanthes colubrina; also, the plant itself. -- Serpent eage
(Zoöl.), any one of several species of raptorial birds of the genera
Circaëtus and Spilornis, which prey on serpents. They inhabit Africa,
Southern Europe, and India. The European serpent eagle is Circaëtus
Gallicus. -- Serpent eater. (Zoöl.) (a) The secretary bird. (b) An
Asiatic antelope; the markhoor. -- Serpent fish (Zoöl.), a fish (Cepola
rubescens) with a long, thin, compressed body, and a band of red
running lengthwise. -- Serpent star (Zoöl.), an ophiuran; a brittle
star. -- Serpent's tongue (Paleon.), the fossil tooth of a shark; -- so
called from its resemblance to a tongue with its root. -- Serpent withe
(Bot.), a West Indian climbing plant (Aristolochia odoratissima). --
Tree serpent (Zoöl.), any species of African serpents belonging to the
family Dendrophidæ.

Ser"pent, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Serpented; p. pr. & vb. n. Serpenting.]
To wind like a serpent; to crook about; to meander. [R.] "The
serpenting of the Thames." Evelyn.

Ser"pent, v. t. To wind; to encircle. [R.] Evelyn.

||Ser`pen*ta"ri*a (?), a.[L. (sc. herba), fr. serpens serpent.] (Med.)
||The fibrous aromatic root of the Virginia snakeroot (Aristolochia
||Serpentaria).

||Ser`pen*ta"ri*us (?), n.[NL., fr. L. serpens serpent.] (Astron.) A
||constellation on the equator, lying between Scorpio and Hercules; --
||called also Ophiuchus.

Ser*pen"ti*form (?), a. [L. serpens a serpent + -form.] Having the form
of a serpent.

Ser`pen*tig"e*nous (?), a. [L. serpens, -entis, a serpent + -genous:
cf. L. serpentigena.] Bred of a serpent.

Ser"pen*tine (?), a. [L. serpentinus: cf. F. serpentin.] Resembling a
serpent; having the shape or qualities of a serpent; subtle; winding or
turning one way and the other, like a moving serpent; anfractuous;
meandering; sinuous; zigzag; as, serpentine braid.

    Thy shape Like his, and color serpentine.


Milton.

Ser"pen*tine, n. [Cf. (for sense 1) F. serpentine, (for sense 2)
serpentin.] 1. (Min.) A mineral or rock consisting chiefly of the
hydrous silicate of magnesia. It is usually of an obscure green color,
often with a spotted or mottled appearance resembling a serpent's skin.
Precious, or noble, serpentine is translucent and of a rich oil-green
color.

Serpentine has been largely produced by the alteration of other
minerals, especially of chrysolite.

2. (Ordnance) A kind of ancient cannon.

Ser"pen*tine, v. i. To serpentize. [R.] Lyttleton.

Ser"pen*tine*ly, adv. In a serpentine manner.

Ser`pen*tin"i*an (?), n. (Eccl.) See 2d Ophite.

Ser"pen*tin*ize (?), v. t. (Min.) To convert (a magnesian silicate)
into serpentine. -- Ser`pen*tin`i*za"tion (#), n.

Ser"pen*ti`nous (?), a. Relating to, or like, serpentine; as, a rock
serpentinous in character.

Ser"pent*ize (?), v. i. To turn or bend like a serpent, first in one
direction and then in the opposite; to meander; to wind; to serpentine.
[R.]

    The river runs before the door, and serpentizes more than you can
    conceive.


Walpole.

Ser"pent*ry (?), n. 1. A winding like a serpent's.

2. A place inhabited or infested by serpents.

Ser"pent-tongued` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a forked tongue, like a
serpent.

Ser"pet (?), n. [L. sirpus, scirpus, a rush, bulrush.] A basket. [Obs.]
Ainsworth.

||Ser*pette" (?), n. [F.] A pruning knife with a curved blade. Knight.

Ser*pig"i*nous (?), a. [Cf. F. serpigineux.] (Med.) Creeping; -- said
of lesions which heal over one portion while continuing to advance at
another.

||Ser*pi"go (?), n. [LL., fr. L. serpere to creep.] (Med.) A dry, scaly
||eruption on the skin; especially, a ringworm.

Ser"po*let (?), n. [F.] (Bot.) Wild thyme.

||Ser"pu*la (?), n.; pl. Serpulæ (#), E. Serpulas (#). [L., a little
||snake. See Serpent.] (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of
||tubicolous annelids of the genus Serpula and allied genera of the
||family Serpulidæ. They secrete a calcareous tube, which is usually
||irregularly contorted, but is sometimes spirally coiled. The worm has
||a wreath of plumelike and often bright-colored gills around its head,
||and usually an operculum to close the aperture of its tube when it
||retracts.

{ Ser*pu"li*an (?), Ser*pu"li*dan (?), } n. (Zoöl.) A serpula.

Ser"pu*lite (?), n. A fossil serpula shell.

Serr (?), v. t. [F. serrer. See Serry.] To crowd, press, or drive
together. [Obs.] Bacon.

Ser*ra"noid (?), n. [NL. Serranus, a typical genus (fr. L. serra a saw)
+ - oid.] (Zoöl.) Any fish of the family Serranidæ, which includes the
striped bass, the black sea bass, and many other food fishes. -- a.
(Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Serranidæ.

{ Ser"rate (?), Ser"ra*ted (?), } a. [L. serratus, fr. serra a saw;
perhaps akin to secare to cut, E. saw a cutting instrument. Cf.
Sierra.] 1. Notched on the edge, like a saw.

2. (Bot.) Beset with teeth pointing forwards or upwards; as, serrate
leaves.

Doubly serrate, having small serratures upon the large ones, as the
leaves of the elm. -- Serrate- ciliate, having fine hairs, like the
eyelashes, on the serratures; -- said of a leaf. -- Serrate- dentate,
having the serratures toothed.

Ser*ra"tion (?), n. 1. Condition of being serrate; formation in the
shape of a saw.

2. One of the teeth in a serrate or serrulate margin.

Ser*ra`ti*ros"tral (?), a. [Serrate + rostral.] (Zoöl.) Having a
toothed bill, like that of a toucan.

Ser*ra"tor (?), n. [NL.] (Zoöl.) The ivory gull (Larus eburneus).

Ser"ra*ture (?), n. [L. serratura a sawing, fr. serrare to saw.] 1. A
notching, like that between the teeth of a saw, in the edge of
anything. Martyn.

2. One of the teeth in a serrated edge; a serration.

Ser"ri*ca`ted (?), a. [See Sericeous.] Covered with fine silky down.

Ser"ri*corn (?), a. [L. serra saw + cornu horn.] (Zoöl.) Having
serrated antenn&?;.

Ser"ri*corn, n. (Zoöl.) Any one of a numerous tribe of beetles
(Serricornia). The joints of the antennæ are prominent, thus producing
a serrate appearance. See Illust. under Antenna.

Ser"ried (?), a. [See Serry.] Crowded; compact; dense; pressed
together.

    Nor seemed it to relax their serried files.


Milton.

||Ser*rif"e*ra (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. L. serra saw + ferre to bear.]
||(Zoöl.) A division of Hymenoptera comprising the sawflies.

||Ser`ri*ros"tres (?), n. pl. [NL. fr. L. serra saw + rostrum beak.]
||(Zoöl.) Same as Lamellirostres.

Ser"rous (?), a. [L. serra a saw.] Like the teeth off a saw; jagged.
[Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Ser"ru*la (?), n. [L., a little saw.] (Zoöl.) The red-breasted
merganser.

{ Ser"rulate (?), Ser"ru*la`ted (?), } a. [L. serrula a little saw,
dim. of serra a saw.] Finely serrate; having very minute teeth.

Ser`ru*la"tion (?), n. 1. The state of being notched minutely, like a
fine saw. Wright.

2. One of the teeth in a serrulate margin.

Ser"ry (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Serried (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Serrying.]
[F. serrer, LL. serrare, serare, from L. sera a bar, bolt; akin to
serere to join or bind together. See Serries.] To crowd; to press
together. [Now perhaps only in the form serried, p. p. or a.]

||Ser`tu*la"ri*a (?), n. [NL., dim. fr. L. serta a garland.] (Zoöl.) A
||genus of delicate branching hydroids having small sessile hydrothecæ
||along the sides of the branches.

Ser`tu*la"ri*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of Sertularia, or of
Sertularidæ, a family of hydroids having branched chitinous stems and
simple sessile hydrothecæ. Also used adjectively.

Se"rum (s"rm), n. [L., akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?;, Skr. sra curd.]
(Physiol.) (a) The watery portion of certain animal fluids, as blood,
milk, etc. (b) A thin watery fluid, containing more or less albumin,
secreted by the serous membranes of the body, such as the pericardium
and peritoneum.

Blood serum, the pale yellowish fluid which exudes from the clot formed
in the coagulation of the blood; the liquid portion of the blood, after
removal of the blood corpuscles and the fibrin. -- Muscle serum, the
thin watery fluid which separates from the muscles after coagulation of
the muscle plasma; the watery portion of the plasma. See Muscle plasma,
under Plasma. -- Serum albumin (Physiol. Chem.), an albuminous body,
closely related to egg albumin, present in nearly all serous fluids;
esp., the albumin of blood serum. -- Serum globulin (Physiol. Chem.),
paraglobulin. -- Serum of milk (Physiol. Chem.), the whey, or fluid
portion of milk, remaining after removal of the casein and fat.

Serv"a*ble (?), a. [See Serve.] 1. Capable of being served.

2. [L. servabilis.] Capable of being preserved. [R.]

Serv"age (?), n. [Cf. F. servage.] Serfage; slavery; servitude. [Obs.]
Chaucer.

Ser"val (?), n. [Cf. F. serval.] (Zoöl.) An African wild cat (Felis
serval) of moderate size. It has rather long legs and a tail of
moderate length. Its color is tawny, with black spots on the body and
rings of black on the tail.

Ser"val*ine (?), a. (Zoöl.) Related to, or resembling, the serval.

Serv"ant (?), n. [OE. servant, servaunt, F. servant, a & p. pr. of
servir to serve, L. servire. See Serve, and cf. Sergeant.] 1. One who
serves, or does services, voluntarily or on compulsion; a person who is
employed by another for menial offices, or for other labor, and is
subject to his command; a person who labors or exerts himself for the
benefit of another, his master or employer; a subordinate helper. "A
yearly hired servant." Lev. xxv. 53.

    Men in office have begun to think themselves mere agents and
    servants of the appointing power, and not agents of the government
    or the country.


D. Webster.

In a legal sense, stewards, factors, bailiffs, and other agents, are
servants for the time they are employed in such character, as they act
in subordination to others. So any person may be legally the servant of
another, in whose business, and under whose order, direction, and
control, he is acting for the time being. Chitty.

2. One in a state of subjection or bondage.

    Thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt.


Deut. v. 15.

3. A professed lover or suitor; a gallant. [Obs.]

    In my time a servant was I one.


Chaucer.

Servant of servants, one debased to the lowest condition of servitude.
-- Your humble servant, or Your obedient servant, phrases of civility
often used in closing a letter.

    Our betters tell us they are our humble servants, but understand us
    to be their slaves.


Swift.

Serv"ant, v. t. To subject. [Obs.] Shak.

Serv"ant*ess, n. A maidservant. [Obs.] Wyclif.

Serv"ant*ry (?), n. A body of servants; servants, collectively. [R.]

Serve (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Served (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Serving.]
[OE. serven, servien, OF. & F. servir, fr. L. servire; akin to servus a
servant or slave, servare to protect, preserve, observe; cf. Zend har
to protect, haurva protecting. Cf. Conserve, Desert merit, Dessert,
Observe, Serf, Sergeant.] 1. To work for; to labor in behalf of; to
exert one's self continuously or statedly for the benefit of; to do
service for; to be in the employment of, as an inferior, domestic,
serf, slave, hired assistant, official helper, etc.; specifically, in a
religious sense, to obey and worship.

    God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit.


Rom. i. 9.

    Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for
    Rachel thy younger daughter.


Gen. xxix. 18.

    No man can serve two masters.


Matt. vi. 24.

    Had I but served my God with half the zeal I served my king, he
    would not in mine age Have left me naked to mine enemies.


Shak.

2. To be subordinate to; to act a secondary part under; to appear as
the inferior of; to minister to.

    Bodies bright and greater should not serve The less not bright.


Milton.

3. To be suitor to; to profess love to. [Obs.]

    To serve a lady in his beste wise.


Chaucer.

4. To wait upon; to supply the wants of; to attend; specifically, to
wait upon at table; to attend at meals; to supply with food; as, to
serve customers in a shop.

    Others, pampered in their shameless pride, Are served in plate and
    in their chariots ride.


Dryden.

5. Hence, to bring forward, arrange, deal, or distribute, as a portion
of anything, especially of food prepared for eating; -- often with up;
formerly with in.

    Bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to
    dinner.


Shak.

    Some part he roasts, then serves it up so dressed.


Dryde.

<! p. 1316 !>

6. To perform the duties belonging to, or required in or for; hence, to
be of use to; as, a curate may serve two churches; to serve one's
country.

7. To contribute or conduce to; to promote; to be sufficient for; to
satisfy; as, to serve one's turn.

    Turn it into some advantage, by observing where it can serve
    another end.


Jer. Taylor.

8. To answer or be (in the place of something) to; as, a sofa serves
one for a seat and a couch.

9. To treat; to behave one's self to; to requite; to act toward; as, he
served me very ill.

10. To work; to operate; as, to serve the guns.

11. (Law) (a) To bring to notice, deliver, or execute, either actually
or constructively, in such manner as the law requires; as, to serve a
summons. (b) To make legal service opon (a person named in a writ,
summons, etc.); as, to serve a witness with a subpœna.

12. To pass or spend, as time, esp. time of punishment; as, to serve a
term in prison.

13. To copulate with; to cover; as, a horse serves a mare; -- said of
the male.

14. (Tennis) To lead off in delivering (the ball).

15. (Naut.) To wind spun yarn, or the like, tightly around (a rope or
cable, etc.) so as to protect it from chafing or from the weather. See
under Serving.

To serve an attachment or a writ of attachment (Law), to levy it on the
person or goods by seizure, or to seize. -- To serve an execution
(Law), to levy it on a lands, goods, or person, by seizure or taking
possession. -- To serve an office, to discharge a public duty. -- To
serve a process (Law), in general, to read it, so as to give due notice
to the party concerned, or to leave an attested copy with him or his
attorney, or his usual place of abode. -- To serve a warrant, to read
it, and seize the person against whom it is issued. -- To serve a writ
(Law), to read it to the defendant, or to leave an attested copy at his
usual place of abode. -- To serve one out, to retaliate upon; to
requite. "I'll serve you out for this." C. Kingsley. -- To serve one
right, to treat, or cause to befall one, according to his deserts; --
used commonly of ill deserts; as, it serves the scoundrel right. -- To
serve one's self of, to avail one's self of; to make use of. [A
Gallicism]

    I will serve myself of this concession.


Chillingworth.

-- To serve out, to distribute; as, to serve out rations. -- To serve
the time or the hour, to regulate one's actions by the requirements of
the time instead of by one's duty; to be a timeserver. [Obs.]

    They think herein we serve the time, because thereby we either hold
    or seek preferment.


Hooker.

Syn. -- To obey; minister to; subserve; promote; aid; help; assist;
benefit; succor.

Serve (?), v. i. 1. To be a servant or a slave; to be employed in labor
or other business for another; to be in subjection or bondage; to
render menial service.

    The Lord shall give thee rest . . . from the hard bondage wherein
    thou wast made to serve.


Isa. xiv. 3.

2. To perform domestic offices; to be occupied with household affairs;
to prepare and dish up food, etc.

    But Martha . . . said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath
    left me to serve alone?


Luke x. 40.

3. To be in service; to do duty; to discharge the requirements of an
office or employment. Specifically, to act in the public service, as a
soldier, seaman. etc.

    Many . . . who had before been great commanders, but now served as
    private gentlemen without pay.


Knolles.

4. To be of use; to answer a purpose; to suffice; to suit; to be
convenient or favorable.

    This little brand will serve to light your fire.


Dryden.

    As occasion serves, this noble queen And prince shall follow with a
    fresh supply.


Shak.

5. (Tennis) To lead off in delivering the ball.

Serv"er (?), n. 1. One who serves.

2. A tray for dishes; a salver. Randolph.

Ser"vi*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Servia, a kingdom of Southern
Europe. -- n. A native or inhabitant of Servia.

{ Serv"ice (?), n., or Serv"ice (?) }. [Properly, the tree which bears
serve, OE. serves, pl., service berries, AS. syrfe service tree; akin
to L. sorbus.] (Bot.) A name given to several trees and shrubs of the
genus Pyrus, as Pyrus domestica and P. torminalis of Europe, the
various species of mountain ash or rowan tree, and the American shad
bush (see Shad bush, under Shad). They have clusters of small, edible,
applelike berries.

Service berry (Bot.), the fruit of any kind of service tree. In British
America the name is especially applied to that of the several species
or varieties of the shad bush (Amelanchier.)

Serv"ice, n. [OE. servise, OF. servise, service, F. service, from L.
servitium. See Serve.] 1. The act of serving; the occupation of a
servant; the performance of labor for the benefit of another, or at
another's command; attendance of an inferior, hired helper, slave,
etc., on a superior, employer, master, or the like; also, spiritual
obedience and love. "O God . . . whose service is perfect freedom." Bk.
of Com. Prayer.

    Madam, I entreat true peace of you, Which I will purchase with my
    duteous service.


Shak.

    God requires no man's service upon hard and unreasonable terms.


Tillotson.

2. The deed of one who serves; labor performed for another; duty done
or required; office.

    I have served him from the hour of my nativity, . . . and have
    nothing at his hands for my service but blows.


Shak.

    This poem was the last piece of service I did for my master, King
    Charles.


Dryden.

    To go on the forlorn hope is a service of peril; who will
    understake it if it be not also a service of honor?


Macaulay.

3. Office of devotion; official religious duty performed; religious
rites appropriate to any event or ceremonial; as, a burial service.

    The outward service of ancient religion, the rites, ceremonies, and
    ceremonial vestments of the old law.


Coleridge.

4. Hence, a musical composition for use in churches.

5. Duty performed in, or appropriate to, any office or charge; official
function; hence, specifically, military or naval duty; performance of
the duties of a soldier.

    When he cometh to experience of service abroad . . . ne maketh a
    worthy soldier.


Spenser.

6. Useful office; advantage conferred; that which promotes interest or
happiness; benefit; avail.

    The stork's plea, when taken in a net, was the service she did in
    picking up venomous creatures.


L'Estrange.

7. Profession of respect; acknowledgment of duty owed. "Pray, do my
service to his majesty." Shak.

8. The act and manner of bringing food to the persons who eat it; order
of dishes at table; also, a set or number of vessels ordinarily used at
table; as, the service was tardy and awkward; a service of plate or
glass.

    There was no extraordinary service seen on the board.


Hakewill.

9. (Law) The act of bringing to notice, either actually or
constructively, in such manner as is prescribed by law; as, the service
of a subpœna or an attachment.

10. (Naut.) The materials used for serving a rope, etc., as spun yarn,
small lines, etc.

11. (Tennis) The act of serving the ball.

12. Act of serving or covering. See Serve, v. t., 13.

Service book, a prayer book or missal. - - Service line (Tennis), a
line parallel to the net, and at a distance of 21 feet from it. --
Service of a writ, process, etc. (Law), personal delivery or
communication of the writ or process, etc., to the party to be affected
by it, so as to subject him to its operation; the reading of it to the
person to whom notice is intended to be given, or the leaving of an
attested copy with the person or his attorney, or at his usual place of
abode. -- Service of an attachment (Law), the seizing of the person or
goods according to the direction. -- Service of an execution (Law), the
levying of it upon the goods, estate, or person of the defendant. --
Service pipe, a pipe connecting mains with a dwelling, as in gas pipes,
and the like. Tomlinson. -- To accept service. (Law) See under Accept.
-- To see service (Mil.), to do duty in the presence of the enemy, or
in actual war.

Serv"ice*a*ble (?), a. 1. Doing service; promoting happiness, interest,
advantage, or any good; useful to any end; adapted to any good end use;
beneficial; advantageous. "Serviceable to religion and learning".
Atterbury. "Serviceable tools." Macaulay.

    I know thee well, a serviceable villain.


Shak.

2. Prepared for rendering service; capable of, or fit for, the
performance of duty; hence, active; diligent.

    Courteous he was, lowly, and servysable.


Chaucer.

    Bright-hearnessed angels sit in order serviceable.


Milton.

    Seeing her so sweet and serviceable.


Tennnyson.

-- Serv"ice*a*ble*ness, n. -- Serv"ice*a*bly, adv.

Serv"ice*age (?), n. Servitude. [Obs.] Fairfax.

Serv"i*ent (?), a. [L. serviens, -entis, p. pr. See Serve.]
Subordinate. [Obs. except in law.] Dyer.

Servient tenement or estate (Law), that on which the burden of a
servitude or an easement is imposed. Cf. Dominant estate, under
Dominant. Gale & Whately.

||Ser`viette" (?), n. [F.] A table napkin.

Serv"ile (?), a. [L. servile, fr. servus a servant or slave: cf. F.
servile. See Serve.] 1. Of or pertaining to a servant or slave;
befitting a servant or a slave; proceeding from dependence; hence,
meanly submissive; slavish; mean; cringing; fawning; as, servile
flattery; servile fear; servile obedience.

    She must bend the servile knee.


Thomson.

    Fearing dying pays death servile breath.


Shak.

2. Held in subjection; dependent; enslaved.

    Even fortune rules no more, O servile land!


Pope.

3. (Gram.) (a) Not belonging to the original root; as, a servile
letter. (b) Not itself sounded, but serving to lengthen the preceeding
vowel, as e in tune.

Serv"ile, n. (Gram.) An element which forms no part of the original
root; -- opposed to radical.

Serv"ile*ly, adv. In a servile manner; slavishly.

Serv"ile*ness, n. Quality of being servile; servility.

Ser*vil"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. servilité.] The quality or state of being
servile; servileness.

    To be a queen in bondage is more vile Than is a slave in base
    servility.


Shak.

Serv"ing, a. & n. from Serve.

Serving board (Naut.), a flat piece of wood used in serving ropes. --
Serving maid, a female servant; a maidservant. -- Serving mallet
(Naut.), a wooden instrument shaped like a mallet, used in serving
ropes. -- Serving man, a male servant, or attendant; a manservant. --
Serving stuff (Naut.), small lines for serving ropes.

Serv"ite (?), n. [It. servita.] (R.C.Ch.) One of the order of the
Religious Servants of the Holy Virgin, founded in Florence in 1223.

Serv"i*tor (?), n. [L., fr. servire to serve: cf. F. serviteur.] 1. One
who serves; a servant; an attendant; one who acts under another; a
follower or adherent.

    Your trusty and most valiant servitor.


Shak.

2. (Univ. of Oxford, Eng.) An undergraduate, partly supported by the
college funds, whose duty it formerly was to wait at table. A servitor
corresponded to a sizar in Cambridge and Dublin universities.

Serv"i*tor*ship, n. The office, rank, or condition of a servitor.
Boswell.

Serv"i*tude (?), n. [L. servitudo: cf. F. servitude.] 1. The state of
voluntary or compulsory subjection to a master; the condition of being
bound to service; the condition of a slave; slavery; bondage; hence, a
state of slavish dependence.

    You would have sold your king to slaughter, His princes and his
    peers to servitude.


Shak.

    A splendid servitude; . . . for he that rises up early, and goe&?;
    to bed late, only to receive addresses, is really as much abridged
    in his freedom as he that waits to present one.


South.

2. Servants, collectively. [Obs.]

    After him a cumbrous train Of herds and flocks, and numerous
    servitude.


Milton.

3. (Law) A right whereby one thing is subject to another thing or
person for use or convenience, contrary to the common right.

The object of a servitude is either to suffer something to be done by
another, or to omit to do something, with respect to a thing. The
easements of the English correspond in some respects with the
servitudes of the Roman law. Both terms are used by common law writers,
and often indiscriminately. The former, however, rather indicates the
right enjoyed, and the latter the burden imposed. Ayliffe. Erskine. E.
Washburn.

Penal servitude. See under Penal. -- Personal servitude (Law), that
which arises when the use of a thing is granted as a real right to a
particular individual other than the proprietor. -- Predial servitude
(Law), that which one estate owes to another estate. When it related to
lands, vineyards, gardens, or the like, it is called rural; when it
related to houses and buildings, it is called urban.

Serv"i*ture (?), n. Servants, collectively. [Obs.]

Serv"i*tute (?), n. [L. servitus.] Servitude. [Obs.]

Se"rye (?), n. A series. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Ses"a*me (?), n. [L. sesamum, sesama, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;: cf.
F. sésame.] (Bot.) Either of two annual herbaceous plants of the genus
Sesamum (S. Indicum, and S. orientale), from the seeds of which an oil
is expressed; also, the small obovate, flattish seeds of these plants,
sometimes used as food. See Benne.

Open Sesame, the magical command which opened the door of the robber's
den in the Arabian Nights' tale of "The Forty Thieves;" hence, a
magical password. -- Sesame grass. (Bot.) Same as Gama grass.

Ses"a*moid (?), a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; like sesame; &?;&?;&?;&?;&?;
sesame + &?;&?;&?; form: cf. F. sésamoïde.] 1. Resembling in shape the
seeds of sesame.

2. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sesamoid bones or cartilages;
sesamoidal.

Sesamoid bones, Sesamoid cartilages (Anat.), small bones or cartilages
formed in tendons, like the patella and pisiform in man.

Ses"a*moid, n. (Anat.) A sesamoid bone or cartilage.

Ses`a*moid"al (?), a. (Anat.) Sesamoid.

Ses"ban (?), n. [F., fr. Ar. saisabn, seisebn, a kind of tree, fr. Per.
ssabn seed of cinquefoil.] (Bot.) A leguminous shrub (Sesbania
aculeata) which furnishes a fiber used for making ropes.

The name is applied also to the similar plant, Sesbania Ægyptiaca, and
other species of the same genus.

||Ses`qui- (?). [L., one half more, one and a half.] (Chem.) A
||combining form (also used adjectively) denoting that three atoms or
||equivalents of the substance to the name of which it is prefixed are
||combined with two of some other element or radical; as,
||sesquibromide, sesquicarbonate, sesquichloride, sesquioxide.

Sesquidupli- is sometimes, but rarely, used in the same manner to
denote the proportions of two and a half to one, or rather of five to
two.

Ses`qui*al"ter (?), a. Sesquialteral.

{ Ses`qui*al"ter (?), Ses`qui*al"ter*a (?), } n. [NL. sesquialtera.]
(Mus.) A stop on the organ, containing several ranks of pipes which
reënforce some of the high harmonics of the ground tone, and make the
sound more brilliant.

{ Ses`qui*al"ter*al (?), Ses`qui*al"ter*ate (?), } a. [L. sesquialter
once and a half; sesqui- + alter other: cf. F. sesquialtére.] Once and
a half times as great as another; having the ratio of one and a half to
one.

Sesquialteral ratio (Math.), the ratio of one and a half to one; thus,
9 and 6 are in a sesquialteral ratio.

Ses`qui*al"ter*ous (?), a. Sesquialteral.

Ses`qui*ba"sic (?), a. [Sesqui- + basic.] (Chem.) Containing, or acting
as, a base in the proportions of a sesqui compound.

Ses`qui*du"pli*cate (?), a. [Sesqui-  + duplicate.] Twice and a half as
great (as another thing); having the ratio of two and a half to one.

Sesquiduplicate ratio (Math.), the ratio of two and a half to one, or
one in which the greater term contains the lesser twice and a half, as
that of 50 to 20.

Ses`qui*ox"ide (?), n. [Sesqui- + oxide.] (Chem.) An oxide containing
three atoms of oxygen with two atoms (or radicals) of some other
substance; thus, alumina, Al2O3 is a sesquioxide.

{ Ses*quip"e*dal (?), Ses`qui*pe*da"li*an (?), } a. [Sesqui- + pedal:
cf. F. sesquipédal, L. sesquipedalis.] Measuring or containing a foot
and a half; as, a sesquipedalian pygmy; -- sometimes humorously applied
to long words.

{ Ses`qui*pe*da"li*an*ism (?), Ses*quip"e*dal*ism (?), } n.
Sesquipedality.

Ses`qui*pe*dal"i*ty (?), n. 1. The quality or condition of being
sesquipedal. Sterne.

2. The use of sesquipedalian words; style characterized by the use of
long words; sesquipedalism.

Ses*quip"li*cate (?), a. [Sesqui- + plicate.] (Math.) Subduplicate of
the triplicate; -- a term applied to ratios; thus, a and a&prime; are
in the sesquiplicate ratio of b and b&prime;, when a is to a&prime; as
the square root of the cube of b is to the square root of the cube of
b&prime;, or a:a&prime;::&radic;b3:&radic;b&prime;3.

    The periodic times of the planets are in the sesquiplicate ratio of
    their mean distances.


Sir I. Newton.

Ses"qui*salt (?), n. [Sesqui- + salt.] (Chem.) A salt derived from a
sesquioxide base, or made up on the proportions of a sesqui compound.

<! p. 1317 !>

Ses`qui*sul"phide (?), n. [Sesqui-  + sulphide.] (Chem.) A sulphide,
analogous to a sesquioxide, containing three atoms of sulphur to two of
the other ingredient; -- formerly called also sesquisulphuret; as,
orpiment, As2S3 is arsenic sesquisulphide.

Ses`qui*ter"tial (?), a. Sesquitertian.

{ Ses`qui*ter"tian (?), Ses`qui*ter"tian*al (?), } a. [Sesqui- + L.
tertianus belonging to the third. Cf. Tertian.] (Math.) Having the
ratio of one and one third to one (as 4 : 3).

Ses"qui*tone (?), n. [Sesqui- + tone.] (Mus.) A minor third, or
interval of three semitones.

Sess (?), v. t. [Aphetic form of assess. See Assess, Cess.] To lay a
tax upon; to assess. [Obs.]

Sess, n. A tax; an assessment. See Cess. [Obs.]

Ses"sa (?), interj. Hurry; run. [Obs.] Shak.

Ses"sile (?), a. [L. sessilis low, dwarf, from sedere, sessum, to sit:
cf. F. sessile.] 1. Attached without any sensible projecting support.

2. (Bot.) Resting directly upon the main stem or branch, without a
petiole or footstalk; as, a sessile leaf or blossom.

3. (Zoöl.) Permanently attached; - - said of the gonophores of certain
hydroids which never became detached.

Ses"sile-eyed` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having eyes which are not elevated on a
stalk; -- opposed to stalk-eyed.

Sessile-eyed Crustacea, the Arthrostraca.

Ses"sion (?), n. [L. sessio, fr. sedere, sessum, to sit: cf. F.
session. See Sit.] 1. The act of sitting, or the state of being seated.
[Archaic]

    So much his ascension into heaven and his session at the right hand
    of God do import.


Hooker.

    But Viven, gathering somewhat of his mood, . . . Leaped from her
    session on his lap, and stood.


Tennyson.

2. The actual sitting of a court, council, legislature, etc., or the
actual assembly of the members of such a body, for the transaction of
business.

    It's fit this royal session do proceed.


Shak.

3. Hence, also, the time, period, or term during which a court,
council, legislature, etc., meets daily for business; or, the space of
time between the first meeting and the prorogation or adjournment;
thus, a session of Parliaments is opened with a speech from the throne,
and closed by prorogation. The session of a judicial court is called a
term.

    It was resolved that the convocation should meet at the beginning
    of the next session of Parliament.


Macaulay.

Sessions, in some of the States, is particularly used as a title for a
court of justices, held for granting licenses to innkeepers, etc., and
for laying out highways, and the like; it is also the title of several
courts of criminal jurisdiction in England and the United States.

Church session, the lowest court in the Presbyterian Church, composed
of the pastor and a body of elders elected by the members of a
particular church, and having the care of matters pertaining to the
religious interests of that church, as the admission and dismission of
members, discipline, etc. -- Court of Session, the supreme civil court
of Scotland. -- Quarter sessions. (Eng.Law) See under Quarter. --
Sessions of the peace, sittings held by justices of the peace. [Eng.]

Ses"sion*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a session or sessions.

Sess"pool` (?), n. [Prov. E. suss hogwash, soss a dirty mess, a puddle
+ E. pool a puddle; cf. Gael. ses a coarse mess.] Same as Cesspool.

Ses"terce (?), n. [L. sestertius (sc. nummus), fr. sestertius two and a
half; semis half + tertius third: cf. F. sesterce.] (Rom. Antiq.) A
Roman coin or denomination of money, in value the fourth part of a
denarius, and originally containing two asses and a half, afterward
four asses, -- equal to about two pence sterling, or four cents.

The sestertium was equivalent to one thousand sesterces, equal to £8
17s 1d. sterling, or about $43, before the reign of Augustus. After his
reign its value was about £7 16s. 3d. sterling. The sesterce was
originally coined only in silver, but later both in silver and brass.

Ses*tet" (?), n. [It. sestetto, fr. sesto sixth, L. sextus, fr. sex
six.] 1. (Mus.) A piece of music composed for six voices or six
instruments; a sextet; -- called also sestuor. [Written also sestett,
sestette.]

2. (Poet.) The last six lines of a sonnet.

||Ses*tet"to (?), n.[It.] (Mus.) A sestet.

Ses"tine (?), n. See Sextain.

Ses"tu*or (?), n. [F.] A sestet.

Set (st), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Set; p. pr. & vb. n. Setting.] [OE.
setten, AS. setton; akin to OS. settian, OFries. setta, D. zetten, OHG.
sezzen, G. setzen, Icel. setja, Sw. sätta, Dan. s&?;tte, Goth. satjan;
causative from the root of E. sit. &radic;154. See Sit, and cf. Seize.]
1. To cause to sit; to make to assume a specified position or attitude;
to give site or place to; to place; to put; to fix; as, to set a house
on a stone foundation; to set a book on a shelf; to set a dish on a
table; to set a chest or trunk on its bottom or on end.

    I do set my bow in the cloud.


Gen. ix. 13.

2. Hence, to attach or affix (something) to something else, or in or
upon a certain place.

    Set your affection on things above.


Col. iii. 2.

    The Lord set a mark upon Cain.


Gen. iv. 15.

3. To make to assume specified place, condition, or occupation; to put
in a certain condition or state (described by the accompanying words);
to cause to be.

    The Lord thy God will set thee on high.


Deut. xxviii. 1.

    I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and the
    daughter against her mother.


Matt. x. 35.

    Every incident sets him thinking.


Coleridge.

4. To fix firmly; to make fast, permanent, or stable; to render
motionless; to give an unchanging place, form, or condition to.
Specifically: --

(a) To cause to stop or stick; to obstruct; to fasten to a spot; hence,
to occasion difficulty to; to embarrass; as, to set a coach in the mud.

    They show how hard they are set in this particular.


Addison.

(b) To fix beforehand; to determine; hence, to make unyielding or
obstinate; to render stiff, unpliant, or rigid; as, to set one's
countenance.

    His eyes were set by reason of his age.


1 Kings xiv. 4.

    On these three objects his heart was set.


Macaulay.

    Make my heart as a millstone, set my face as a flint.


Tennyson.

(c) To fix in the ground, as a post or a tree; to plant; as, to set
pear trees in an orchard.

(d) To fix, as a precious stone, in a border of metal; to place in a
setting; hence, to place in or amid something which serves as a
setting; as, to set glass in a sash.

    And him too rich a jewel to be set In vulgar metal for a vulgar
    use.


Dryden.

(e) To render stiff or solid; especially, to convert into curd; to
curdle; as, to set milk for cheese.

5. To put into a desired position or condition; to adjust; to regulate;
to adapt. Specifically: --

(a) To put in order in a particular manner; to prepare; as, to set
(that is, to hone) a razor; to set a saw.

    Tables for to sette, and beddes make.


Chaucer.

(b) To extend and bring into position; to spread; as, to set the sails
of a ship.

(c) To give a pitch to, as a tune; to start by fixing the keynote; as,
to set a psalm. Fielding.

(d) To reduce from a dislocated or fractured state; to replace; as, to
set a broken bone.

(e) To make to agree with some standard; as, to set a watch or a clock.

(f) (Masonry) To lower into place and fix solidly, as the blocks of cut
stone in a structure.

6. To stake at play; to wager; to risk.

    I have set my life upon a cast, And I will stand the hazard of the
    die.


Shak.

7. To fit with music; to adapt, as words to notes; to prepare for
singing.

    Set thy own songs, and sing them to thy lute.


Dryden.

8. To determine; to appoint; to assign; to fix; as, to set a time for a
meeting; to set a price on a horse.

9. To adorn with something infixed or affixed; to stud; to variegate
with objects placed here and there.

    High on their heads, with jewels richly set, Each lady wore a
    radiant coronet.


Dryden.

    Pastoral dales thin set with modern farms.


Wordsworth.

10. To value; to rate; -- with at.

    Be you contented, wearing now the garland, To have a son set your
    decrees at naught.


Shak.

    I do not set my life at a pin's fee.


Shak.

11. To point out the seat or position of, as birds, or other game; --
said of hunting dogs.

12. To establish as a rule; to furnish; to prescribe; to assign; as, to
set an example; to set lessons to be learned.

13. To suit; to become; as, it sets him ill. [Scot.]

14. (Print.) To compose; to arrange in words, lines, etc.; as, to set
type; to set a page.

To set abroach. See Abroach. [Obs.] Shak. -- To set against, to oppose;
to set in comparison with, or to oppose to, as an equivalent in
exchange; as, to set one thing against another. -- To set agoing, to
cause to move. -- To set apart, to separate to a particular use; to
separate from the rest; to reserve. -- To set a saw, to bend each tooth
a little, every alternate one being bent to one side, and the
intermediate ones to the other side, so that the opening made by the
saw may be a little wider than the thickness of the back, to prevent
the saw from sticking. -- To set aside. (a) To leave out of account; to
pass by; to omit; to neglect; to reject; to annul.

    Setting aside all other considerations, I will endeavor to know the
    truth, and yield to that.


Tillotson.

(b) To set apart; to reserve; as, to set aside part of one's income.
(c) (Law) See under Aside. -- To set at defiance, to defy. -- To set at
ease, to quiet; to tranquilize; as, to set the heart at ease. -- To set
at naught, to undervalue; to contemn; to despise. "Ye have set at
naught all my counsel." Prov. i. 25. -- To set a trap, snare, or gin,
to put it in a proper condition or position to catch prey; hence, to
lay a plan to deceive and draw another into one's power. -- To set at
work, or To set to work. (a) To cause to enter on work or action, or to
direct how tu enter on work. (b) To apply one's self; -- used
reflexively. -- To set before. (a) To bring out to view before; to
exhibit. (b) To propose for choice to; to offer to. -- To set by. (a)
To set apart or on one side; to reject. (b) To attach the value of
(anything) to. "I set not a straw by thy dreamings." Chaucer. -- To set
by the compass, to observe and note the bearing or situation of by the
compass. -- To set case, to suppose; to assume. Cf. Put case, under
Put, v. t. [Obs.] Chaucer. -- To set down. (a) To enter in writing; to
register.

    Some rules were to be set down for the government of the army.


Clarendon.

(b) To fix; to establish; to ordain.

    This law we may name eternal, being that order which God . . . hath
    set down with himself, for himself to do all things by.


Hooker.

(c) To humiliate. -- To set eyes on, to see; to behold; to fasten the
eyes on. -- To set fire to, or To set on fire, to communicate fire to;
fig., to inflame; to enkindle the passions of; to irritate. -- To set
flying (Naut.), to hook to halyards, sheets, etc., instead of extending
with rings or the like on a stay; -- said of a sail. -- To set forth.
(a) To manifest; to offer or present to view; to exhibt; to display.
(b) To publish; to promulgate; to make appear. Waller. (c) To send out;
to prepare and send. [Obs.]

    The Venetian admiral had a fleet of sixty galleys, set forth by the
    Venetians.


Knolles.

-- To set forward. (a) To cause to advance. (b) To promote. -- To set
free, to release from confinement, imprisonment, or bondage; to
liberate; to emancipate. -- To set in, to put in the way; to begin; to
give a start to. [Obs.]

    If you please to assist and set me in, I will recollect myself.


Collier.

-- To set in order, to adjust or arrange; to reduce to method. "The
rest will I set in order when I come." 1 Cor. xi. 34. -- To set milk.
(a) To expose it in open dishes in order that the cream may rise to the
surface. (b) To cause it to become curdled as by the action of rennet.
See 4 (e). -- To set much, or little, by, to care much, or little, for.
-- To set of, to value; to set by. [Obs.] "I set not an haw of his
proverbs." Chaucer. -- To set off. (a) To separate from a whole; to
assign to a particular purpose; to portion off; as, to set off a
portion of an estate. (b) To adorn; to decorate; to embellish.

    They . . . set off the worst faces with the best airs.


Addison.

(c) To give a flattering description of. - - To set off against, to
place against as an equivalent; as, to set off one man's services
against another's. -- To set on or upon. (a) To incite; to instigate.
"Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this." Shak. (b) To employ, as
in a task. " Set on thy wife to observe." Shak. (c) To fix upon; to
attach strongly to; as, to set one's heart or affections on some
object. See definition 2, above. -- To set one's cap for. See under
Cap, n. -- To set one's self against, to place one's self in a state of
enmity or opposition to. -- To set one's teeth, to press them together
tightly. -- To set on foot, to set going; to put in motion; to start.
-- To set out. (a) To assign; to allot; to mark off; to limit; as, to
set out the share of each proprietor or heir of an estate; to set out
the widow's thirds. (b) To publish, as a proclamation. [Obs.] (c) To
adorn; to embellish.

    An ugly woman, in rich habit set out with jewels, nothing can
    become.


Dryden.

(d) To raise, equip, and send forth; to furnish. [R.]

    The Venetians pretend they could set out, in case of great
    necessity, thirty men-of-war.


Addison.

(e) To show; to display; to recommend; to set off.

    I could set out that best side of Luther.


Atterbury.

(f) To show; to prove. [R.] "Those very reasons set out how heinous his
sin was." Atterbury. (g) (Law) To recite; to state at large. -- To set
over. (a) To appoint or constitute as supervisor, inspector, ruler, or
commander. (b) To assign; to transfer; to convey. -- To set right, to
correct; to put in order. -- To set sail. (Naut.) See under Sail, n. --
To set store by, to consider valuable. -- To set the fashion, to
determine what shall be the fashion; to establish the mode. -- To set
the teeth on edge, to affect the teeth with a disagreeable sensation,
as when acids are brought in contact with them. -- To set the watch
(Naut.), to place the starboard or port watch on duty. -- To set to, to
attach to; to affix to. "He . . . hath set to his seal that God is
true." John iii. 33. -- To set up. (a) To erect; to raise; to elevate;
as, to set up a building, or a machine; to set up a post, a wall, a
pillar. (b) Hence, to exalt; to put in power. "I will . . . set up the
throne of David over Israel." 2 Sam. iii. 10. (c) To begin, as a new
institution; to institute; to establish; to found; as, to set up a
manufactory; to set up a school. (d) To enable to commence a new
business; as, to set up a son in trade. (e) To place in view; as, to
set up a mark. (f) To raise; to utter loudly; as, to set up the voice.

    I'll set up such a note as she shall hear.


Dryden.

(g) To advance; to propose as truth or for reception; as, to set up a
new opinion or doctrine. T. Burnet. (h) To raise from depression, or to
a sufficient fortune; as, this good fortune quite set him up. (i) To
intoxicate. [Slang] (j) (Print.) To put in type; as, to set up copy; to
arrange in words, lines, etc., ready for printing; as, to set up type.
-- To set up the rigging (Naut.), to make it taut by means of tackles.
R. H. Dana, Jr.

Syn. -- See Put.

Set (st), v. i. 1. To pass below the horizon; to go down; to decline;
to sink out of sight; to come to an end.

    Ere the weary sun set in the west.


Shak.

    Thus this century sets with little mirth, and the next is likely to
    arise with more mourning.


Fuller.

2. To fit music to words. [Obs.] Shak.

3. To place plants or shoots in the ground; to plant. "To sow dry, and
set wet." Old Proverb.

4. To be fixed for growth; to strike root; to begin to germinate or
form; as, cuttings set well; the fruit has set well (i. e., not blasted
in the blossom).

5. To become fixed or rigid; to be fastened.

    A gathering and serring of the spirits together to resist, maketh
    the teeth to set hard one against another.


Bacon.

6. To congeal; to concrete; to solidify.

    That fluid substance in a few minutes begins to set.


Boyle.

7. To have a certain direction in motion; to flow; to move on; to tend;
as, the current sets to the north; the tide sets to the windward.

8. To begin to move; to go out or forth; to start; -- now followed by
out.

    The king is set from London.


Shak.

9. To indicate the position of game; -- said of a dog; as, the dog sets
well; also, to hunt game by the aid of a setter.

10. To apply one's self; to undertake earnestly; -- now followed by
out.

    If he sets industriously and sincerely to perform the commands of
    Christ, he can have no ground of doubting but it shall prove
    successful to him.


Hammond.

11. To fit or suit one; to sit; as, the coat sets well. [Colloquially
used, but improperly, for sit.]

The use of the verb set for sit in such expressions as, the hen is
setting on thirteen eggs; a setting hen, etc., although colloquially
common, and sometimes tolerated in serious writing, is not to be
approved.

To set about, to commence; to begin. -- To set forward, to move or
march; to begin to march; to advance. -- To set forth, to begin a
journey. -- To set in. (a) To begin; to enter upon a particular state;
as, winter set in early. (b) To settle one's self; to become
established. "When the weather was set in to be very bad." Addison. (c)
To flow toward the shore; -- said of the tide. -- To set off. (a) To
enter upon a journey; to start. (b) (Typog.) To deface or soil the next
sheet; -- said of the ink on a freshly printed sheet, when another
sheet comes in contact with it before it has had time to dry. -- To set
on or upon. (a) To begin, as a journey or enterprise; to set about.

    He that would seriously set upon the search of truth.


Locke.

(b) To assault; to make an attack. Bacon.

    Cassio hath here been set on in the dark.


Shak.

-- To set out, to begin a journey or course; as, to set out for London,
or from London; to set out in business;to set out in life or the world.
-- To set to, to apply one's self to. -- To set up. (a) To begin
business or a scheme of life; as, to set up in trade; to set up for
one's self. (b) To profess openly; to make pretensions.

    Those men who set up for mortality without regard to religion, are
    generally but virtuous in part.


Swift.

<! p. 1318 !>

Set (?), a. 1. Fixed in position; immovable; rigid; as, a set line; a
set countenance.

2. Firm; unchanging; obstinate; as, set opinions or prejudices.

3. Regular; uniform; formal; as, a set discourse; a set battle. "The
set phrase of peace." Shak.

4. Established; prescribed; as, set forms of prayer.

5. Adjusted; arranged; formed; adapted.

Set hammer. (a) A hammer the head of which is not tightly fastened upon
the handle, but may be reversed. Knight. (b) A hammer with a concave
face which forms a die for shaping anything, as the end of a bolt,
rivet, etc. -- Set line, a line to which a number of baited hooks are
attached, and which, supported by floats and properly secured, may be
left unguarded during the absence of the fisherman. -- Set nut, a jam
nut or lock nut. See under Nut. -- Set screw (Mach.), a screw,
sometimes cupped or printed at one end, and screwed through one part,
as of a machine, tightly upon another part, to prevent the one from
slipping upon the other. -- Set speech, a speech carefully prepared
before it is delivered in public; a formal or methodical speech.

Set, n. 1. The act of setting, as of the sun or other heavenly body;
descent; hence, the close; termination. "Locking at the set of day."
Tennyson.

    The weary sun hath made a golden set.


Shak.

2. That which is set, placed, or fixed. Specifically: -- (a) A young
plant for growth; as, a set of white thorn. (b) That which is staked; a
wager; a venture; a stake; hence, a game at venture. [Obs. or R.]

    We will in France, by God's grace, play a set Shall strike his
    father's crown into the hazard.


Shak.

    That was but civil war, an equal set.


Dryden.

(c) (Mech.) Permanent change of figure in consequence of excessive
strain, as from compression, tension, bending, twisting, etc.; as, the
set of a spring.

(d) A kind of punch used for bending, indenting, or giving shape to,
metal; as, a saw set.

(e) (Pile Driving) A piece placed temporarily upon the head of a pile
when the latter cannot be reached by the weight, or hammer, except by
means of such an intervening piece. [Often incorrectly written sett.]

(f) (Carp.) A short steel spike used for driving the head of a nail
below the surface.

3. [Perhaps due to confusion with sect, sept.] A number of things of
the same kind, ordinarily used or classed together; a collection of
articles which naturally complement each other, and usually go
together; an assortment; a suit; as, a set of chairs, of china, of
surgical or mathematical instruments, of books, etc. [In this sense,
sometimes incorrectly written sett.]

4. A number of persons associated by custom, office, common opinion,
quality, or the like; a division; a group; a clique. "Others of our
set." Tennyson.

    This falls into different divisions, or sets, of nations connected
    under particular religions.


R. P. Ward.

5. Direction or course; as, the set of the wind, or of a current.

6. In dancing, the number of persons necessary to execute a quadrille;
also, the series of figures or movements executed.

7. The deflection of a tooth, or of the teeth, of a saw, which causes
the the saw to cut a kerf, or make an opening, wider than the blade.

8. (a) A young oyster when first attached. (b) Collectively, the crop
of young oysters in any locality.

9. (Tennis) A series of as many games as may be necessary to enable one
side to win six. If at the end of the tenth game the score is a tie,
the set is usually called a deuce set, and decided by an application of
the rules for playing off deuce in a game. See Deuce.

10. (Type Founding) That dimension of the body of a type called by
printers the width.

Dead set. (a) The act of a setter dog when it discovers the game, and
remains intently fixed in pointing it out. (b) A fixed or stationary
condition arising from obstacle or hindrance; a deadlock; as, to be at
a dead set. (c) A concerted scheme to defraud by gaming; a determined
onset. -- To make a dead set, to make a determined onset, literally or
figuratively.

Syn. -- Collection; series; group. See Pair.

||Se"ta (?), n.; pl. Setæ. [L. seta, saeta, a bristle.] 1. (Biol.) Any
||slender, more or less rigid, bristlelike organ or part; as the hairs
||of a caterpillar, the slender spines of a crustacean, the hairlike
||processes of a protozoan, the bristles or stiff hairs on the leaves
||of some plants, or the pedicel of the capsule of a moss.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) One of the movable chitinous spines or hooks of an
annelid. They usually arise in clusters from muscular capsules, and are
used in locomotion and for defense. They are very diverse in form. (b)
One of the spinelike feathers at the base of the bill of certain birds.

Se*ta"ceous (?), a. [L. seta a bristle: cf. F. sétacé.] 1. Set with, or
consisting of, bristles; bristly; as, a stiff, setaceous tail.

2. Bristelike in form or texture; as, a setaceous feather; a setaceous
leaf.

Set"back` (?), n. 1. (Arch.) Offset, n., 4.

2. A backset; a countercurrent; an eddy. [U. S.]

3. A backset; a check; a repulse; a reverse; a relapse. [Colloq. U.S.]

Set"bolt` (?), n. (Shipbuilding) 1. An iron pin, or bolt, for fitting
planks closely together. Craig.

2. A bolt used for forcing another bolt out of its hole.

Set"down` (?), n. The humbling of a person by act or words, especially
by a retort or a reproof; the retort or the reproof which has such
effect.

Set*ee" (?), n. (Naut.) See 2d Settee.

Set"en (?), obs. imp. pl. of Sit. Sat. Chaucer.

Set"e*wale (?), n. See Cetewale. [Obs.]

Set"-fair` (?), n. In plastering, a particularly good troweled surface.
Knight.

Set"foil` (?), n. See Septfoil.

Seth"en (?), adv. & conj. See Since. [Obs.]

Seth"ic (?), a. See Sothic.

Se*tif"er*ous (?), a. [L. seta a bristle + -ferous.] Producing, or
having one or more, bristles.

Se"ti*form (?), a. [Seta + - form: cf. F. sétiforme.] Having the form
or structure of setæ.

Se"ti*ger (?), n. [NL. See Setigerous.] (Zoöl.) An annelid having setæ;
a chætopod.

Se*tig"er*ous (?), a. [Seta + -gerous.] Covered with bristles; having
or bearing a seta or setæ; setiferous; as, setigerous glands; a
setigerous segment of an annelid; specifically (Bot.), tipped with a
bristle.

Se"tim (?), n. See Shittim.

Se*tip"a*rous (?), a. [Seta + L. papere to produce.] (Zoöl.) Producing
setæ; -- said of the organs from which the setæ of annelids arise.

Se"ti*reme (?), n. [Seta + L. remus an oar.] (Zoöl.) A swimming leg (of
an insect) having a fringe of hairs on the margin.

Set"ness (?), n. The quality or state of being set; formality;
obstinacy. "The starched setness of a sententious writer." R. Masters.

Set"-off` (?), n. [Set + off.] 1. That which is set off against another
thing; an offset.

    I do not contemplate such a heroine as a set-off to the many sins
    imputed to me as committed against woman.


D. Jerrold.

2. That which is used to improve the appearance of anything; a
decoration; an ornament.

3. (Law) A counterclaim; a cross debt or demand; a distinct claim filed
or set up by the defendant against the plaintiff's demand.

Set-off differs from recoupment, as the latter generally grows out of
the same matter or contract with the plaintiff's claim, while the
former grows out of distinct matter, and does not of itself deny the
justice of the plaintiff's demand. Offset is sometimes improperly used
for the legal term set- off. See Recoupment.

4. (Arch.) Same as Offset, n., 4.

5. (Print.) See Offset, 7.

Syn. -- Set-off, Offset. -- Offset originally denoted that which
branches off or projects, as a shoot from a tree, but the term has long
been used in America in the sense of set-off. This use is beginning to
obtain in England; though Macaulay uses set-off, and so, perhaps, do a
majority of English writers.

Se"ton (?), n. [F. séton (cf. It. setone), from L. seta a thick, stiff
hair, a bristle.] (Med. & Far.) A few silk threads or horsehairs, or a
strip of linen or the like, introduced beneath the skin by a knife or
needle, so as to form an issue; also, the issue so formed.

{ Se*tose" (?), Se"tous (?), } a. [L. setosus, saetosus, from seta,
saeta, bristle: cf. F. séteux.] Thickly set with bristles or bristly
hairs.

Set"out` (?), n. A display, as of plate, equipage, etc.; that which is
displayed. [Coloq.] Dickens.

Set"-stitched` (?), a. Stitched according to a formal pattern. "An old
set-stiched chair, valanced, and fringed with party-colored worsted
bobs." Sterne.

Sett (?), n. See Set, n., 2 (e) and 3.

Set*tee" (?), n. [From Set; cf. Settle a seat.] A long seat with a
back, -- made to accommodate several persons at once.

Set*tee", n. [F. scétie, scitie.] (Naut.) A vessel with a very long,
sharp prow, carrying two or three masts with lateen sails, -- used in
the Mediterranean. [Written also setee.]

Set"ter (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, sets; -- used mostly in
composition with a noun, as typesetter; or in combination with an
adverb, as a setter on (or inciter), a setter up, a setter forth.

2. (Zoöl.) A hunting dog of a special breed originally derived from a
cross between the spaniel and the pointer. Modern setters are usually
trained to indicate the position of game birds by standing in a fixed
position, but originally they indicated it by sitting or crouching.

There are several distinct varieties of setters; as, the Irish, or red,
setter; the Gordon setter, which is usually red or tan varied with
black; and the English setter, which is variously colored, but usually
white and tawny red, with or without black.

3. One who hunts victims for sharpers. Shak.

4. One who adapts words to music in composition.

5. An adornment; a decoration; -- with off. [Obs.]

    They come as . . . setters off of thy graces.


Whitlock.

6. (Pottery) A shallow seggar for porcelain. Ure.

Set"ter, v. t. To cut the dewlap (of a cow or an ox), and to insert a
seton, so as to cause an issue. [Prov. Eng.]

Set"ter*wort` (?), n. (Bot.) The bear's-foot (Helleborus fœtidus); --
so called because the root was used in settering, or inserting setons
into the dewlaps of cattle. Called also pegroots. Dr. Prior.

Set"ting (?), n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, sets; as, the
setting of type, or of gems; the setting of the sun; the setting
(hardening) of moist plaster of Paris; the setting (set) of a current.

2. The act of marking the position of game, as a setter does; also,
hunting with a setter. Boyle.

3. Something set in, or inserted.

    Thou shalt set in it settings of stones.


Ex. xxviii. 17.

4. That in which something, as a gem, is set; as, the gold setting of a
jeweled pin.

Setting coat (Arch.), the finishing or last coat of plastering on walls
or ceilings. -- Setting dog, a setter. See Setter, n., 2. -- Setting
pole, a pole, often iron- pointed, used for pushing boats along in
shallow water. -- Setting rule. (Print.) A composing rule.

Set"tle (?), n. [OE. setel, setil, a seat, AS. setl: akin to OHG.
sezzal, G. sessel, Goth. sitls, and E. sit. &radic;154. See Sit.] 1. A
seat of any kind. [Obs.] "Upon the settle of his majesty" Hampole.

2. A bench; especially, a bench with a high back.

3. A place made lower than the rest; a wide step or platform lower than
some other part.

    And from the bottom upon the ground, even to the lower settle,
    shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit.


Ezek. xliii. 14.

Settle bed, a bed convertible into a seat. [Eng.]

Set"tle, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Settled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Settling
(?).] [OE. setlen, AS. setlan. &radic;154. See Settle, n. In senses 7,
8, and 9 perhaps confused with OE. sahtlen to reconcile, AS. sahtlian,
fr. saht reconciliation, sacon to contend, dispute. Cf. Sake.] 1. To
place in a fixed or permanent condition; to make firm, steady, or
stable; to establish; to fix; esp., to establish in life; to fix in
business, in a home, or the like.

    And he settled his countenance steadfastly upon him, until he was
    ashamed.


2 Kings viii. 11. (Rev. Ver.)

    The father thought the time drew on Of setting in the world his
    only son.


Dryden.

2. To establish in the pastoral office; to ordain or install as pastor
or rector of a church, society, or parish; as, to settle a minister.
[U. S.]

3. To cause to be no longer in a disturbed condition; to render quiet;
to still; to calm; to compose.

    God settled then the huge whale-bearing lake.


Chapman.

    Hoping that sleep might settle his brains.


Bunyan.

4. To clear of dregs and impurities by causing them to sink; to render
pure or clear; -- said of a liquid; as, to settle coffee, or the
grounds of coffee.

5. To restore or bring to a smooth, dry, or passable condition; -- said
of the ground, of roads, and the like; as, clear weather settles the
roads.

6. To cause to sink; to lower; to depress; hence, also, to render close
or compact; as, to settle the contents of a barrel or bag by shaking
it.

7. To determine, as something which is exposed to doubt or question; to
free from unscertainty or wavering; to make sure, firm, or constant; to
establish; to compose; to quiet; as, to settle the mind when agitated;
to settle questions of law; to settle the succession to a throne; to
settle an allowance.

    It will settle the wavering, and confirm the doubtful.


Swift.

8. To adjust, as something in discussion; to make up; to compose; to
pacify; as, to settle a quarrel.

9. To adjust, as accounts; to liquidate; to balance; as, to settle an
account.

10. Hence, to pay; as, to settle a bill. [Colloq.] Abbott.

11. To plant with inhabitants; to colonize; to people; as, the French
first settled Canada; the Puritans settled New England; Plymouth was
settled in 1620.

To settle on or upon, to confer upon by permanent grant; to assure to.
"I . . . have settled upon him a good annuity." Addison. -- To settle
the land (Naut.), to cause it to sink, or appear lower, by receding
from it.

Syn. -- To fix; establish; regulate; arrange; compose; adjust;
determine; decide.

Set"tle, v. i. 1. To become fixed or permanent; to become stationary;
to establish one's self or itself; to assume a lasting form, condition,
direction, or the like, in place of a temporary or changing state.

    The wind came about and settled in the west.


Bacon.

    Chyle . . . runs through all the intermediate colors until it
    settles in an intense red.


Arbuthnot.

2. To fix one's residence; to establish a dwelling place or home; as,
the Saxons who settled in Britain.

3. To enter into the married state, or the state of a householder.

    As people marry now and settle.


Prior.

4. To be established in an employment or profession; as, to settle in
the practice of law.

5. To become firm, dry, and hard, as the ground after the effects of
rain or frost have disappeared; as, the roads settled late in the
spring.

6. To become clear after being turbid or obscure; to clarify by
depositing matter held in suspension; as, the weather settled; wine
settles by standing.

    A government, on such occasions, is always thick before it settles.


Addison.

7. To sink to the bottom; to fall to the bottom, as dregs of a liquid,
or the sediment of a reserveir.

8. To sink gradually to a lower level; to subside, as the foundation of
a house, etc.

9. To become calm; to cease from agitation.

    Till the fury of his highness settle, Come not before him.


Shak.

10. To adjust differences or accounts; to come to an agreement; as, he
has settled with his creditors.

11. To make a jointure for a wife.

    He sighs with most success that settles well.


Garth.

Set"tled*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being settled; confirmed
state. [R.] Bp. Hall.

Set"tle*ment (?), n. 1. The act of setting, or the state of being
settled. Specifically: --

(a) Establishment in life, in business, condition, etc.; ordination or
installation as pastor.

    Every man living has a design in his head upon wealth power, or
    settlement in the world.


L'Estrange.

(b) The act of peopling, or state of being peopled; act of planting, as
a colony; colonization; occupation by settlers; as, the settlement of a
new country.

<! p. 1319 !>

(c) The act or process of adjusting or determining; composure of doubts
or differences; pacification; liquidation of accounts; arrangement;
adjustment; as, settlement of a controversy, of accounts, etc.

(d) Bestowal, or giving possession, under legal sanction; the act of
giving or conferring anything in a formal and permanent manner.

    My flocks, my fields, my woods, my pastures take, With settlement
    as good as law can make.


Dryden.

(e) (Law) A disposition of property for the benefit of some person or
persons, usually through the medium of trustees, and for the benefit of
a wife, children, or other relatives; jointure granted to a wife, or
the act of granting it.

2. That which settles, or is settled, established, or fixed.
Specifically: --

(a) Matter that subsides; settlings; sediment; lees; dregs. [Obs.]

    Fuller's earth left a thick settlement.


Mortimer.

(b) A colony newly established; a place or region newly settled; as,
settlement in the West.

(c) That which is bestowed formally and permanently; the sum secured to
a person; especially, a jointure made to a woman at her marriage; also,
in the United States, a sum of money or other property formerly granted
to a pastor in additional to his salary.

3. (Arch.) (a) The gradual sinking of a building, whether by the
yielding of the ground under the foundation, or by the compression of
the joints or the material. (b) pl. Fractures or dislocations caused by
settlement.

4. (Law) A settled place of abode; residence; a right growing out of
residence; legal residence or establishment of a person in a particular
parish or town, which entitles him to maintenance if a pauper, and
subjects the parish or town to his support. Blackstone. Bouvier.

Act of settlement (Eng. Hist.), the statute of 12 and 13 William III,
by which the crown was limited to the present reigning house (the house
of Hanover). Blackstone.

Set"tler (?), n. 1. One who settles, becomes fixed, established, etc.

2. Especially, one who establishes himself in a new region or a colony;
a colonist; a planter; as, the first settlers of New England.

3. That which settles or finishes; hence, a blow, etc., which settles
or decides a contest. [Colloq.]

4. A vessel, as a tub, in which something, as pulverized ore suspended
in a liquid, is allowed to settle.

Set"tling (?), n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, settles; the
act of establishing one's self, of colonizing, subsiding, adjusting,
etc.

2. pl. That which settles at the bottom of a liquid; lees; dregs;
sediment. Milton.

Settling day, a day for settling accounts, as in the stock market.

Set"-to` (?), n. A contest in boxing, in an argument, or the like.
[Colloq.] Halliwell.

||Set"u*la (?), n.; pl. Setulæ (#). [L. setula, saetula, dim. of seta,
||saeta, bristle.] A small, short hair or bristle; a small seta.

Set"ule (?), n. [See Setula.] A setula.

Set"u*lose` (?), a. Having small bristles or setæ.

Set"wall` (?), n. [CF. Cetewale.] (Bot.) A plant formerly valued for
its restorative qualities (Valeriana officinalis, or V. Pyrenaica).
[Obs.] [Written also setwal.] Chaucer.

Sev"en (?), a. [OE. seven, seoven, seofen, AS. seofon, seofan, seofen;
akin to D. zeven, OS., Goth., & OHG. sibun, G. sieben, Icel. sjau, sjö,
Sw. sju, Dan. syv, Lith. septyni, Russ. seme, W. saith, Gael. seachd,
Ir. seacht, L. septem, Gr. &?;&?;&?;, Skr. saptan. &radic;305. Cf.
Hebdomad, Heptagon, September.] One more than six; six and one added;
as, seven days make one week.

Seven sciences. See the Note under Science, n., 4. -- Seven stars
(Astron.), the Pleiades. -- Seven wonders of the world. See under
Wonders. -- Seven-year apple (Bot.), a rubiaceous shrub (Genipa
clusiifolia) growing in the West Indies; also, its edible fruit. --
Seven-year vine (Bot.), a tropical climbing plant (Ipomœa tuberosa)
related to the morning- glory.

Sev"en, n. 1. The number greater by one than six; seven units or
objects.

    Of every beast, and bird, and insect small, Game sevens and pairs.


Milton.

2. A symbol representing seven units, as 7, or vii.

Sev"en*fold` (?), a. Repeated seven times; having seven thicknesses;
increased to seven times the size or amount. "Sevenfold rage." Milton.

Sev"en*fold`, adv. Seven times as much or as often.

    Whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold.


Gen. iv. 15.

Seven"night (?), n. A week; any period of seven consecutive days and
nights. See Sennight.

Sev"en*score` (?), n. & a. Seven times twenty, that is, a hundred and
forty.

    The old Countess of Desmond . . . lived sevenscore years.


Bacon.

Sev"en-shoot`er (?), n. A firearm, esp. a pistol, with seven barrels or
chambers for cartridges, or one capable of firing seven shots without
reloading. [Colloq.]

Sev"en*teen` (?), a. [OE. seventene, AS. seofontne, i. e., seven- ten.
Cf. Seventy.] One more than sixteen; ten and seven added; as, seventeen
years.

Sev"en*teen`, n. 1. The number greater by one than sixteen; the sum of
ten and seven; seventeen units or objects.

2. A symbol denoting seventeen units, as 17, or xvii.

Sev"en*teenth` (?), a. [From Seventeen: cf. AS. seofonteóða,
seofonteogeða.] 1. Next in order after the sixteenth; coming after
sixteen others.

    In . . . the seventeenth day of the month . . . were all the
    fountains of the great deep broken up.


Gen. vii. 11.

2. Constituting or being one of seventeen equal parts into which
anything is divided.

Sev"en*teenth` (?), n. 1. The next in order after the sixteenth; one
coming after sixteen others.

2. The quotient of a unit divided by seventeen; one of seventeen equal
parts or divisions of one whole.

3. (Mus.) An interval of two octaves and a third.

Sev"enth (?), a. [From Seven: cf. AS. seofoða.] 1. Next in order after
the sixth;; coming after six others.

    On the seventh day, God ended his work which he had made; and he
    rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.


Gen. ii. 2.

2. Constituting or being one of seven equal parts into which anything
is divided; as, the seventh part.

Seventh day, the seventh day of the week; Saturday. -- Seventh-day
Baptists. See under Baptist.

Sev"enth, n. 1. One next in order after the sixth; one coming after six
others.

2. The quotient of a unit divided by seven; one of seven equal parts
into which anything is divided.

3. (Mus.) (a) An interval embracing seven diatonic degrees of the
scale. (b) A chord which includes the interval of a seventh whether
major, minor, or diminished.

Sev`en-thir"ties (?), n. pl. A name given to three several issues of
United States Treasury notes, made during the Civil War, in
denominations of $50 and over, bearing interest at the rate of seven
and three tenths (thirty hundredths) per cent annually. Within a few
years they were all redeemed or funded.

Sev"enth*ly (?), adv. In the seventh place.

Sev"en*ti*eth (?), a. [AS. hund- seofontigoða.] 1. Next in order after
the sixty-ninth; as, a man in the seventieth year of his age.

2. Constituting or being one of seventy equal parts.

Sev"en*ti*eth, n. 1. One next in order after the sixty-ninth.

2. The quotient of a unit divided by seventy; one of seventy equal
parts or fractions.

Sev"en*ty (?), a. [AS. hund- seofontig. See Seven, and Ten, and cf.
Seventeen, Sixty.] Seven times ten; one more than sixty-nine.

Sev"en*ty, n.; pl. Seventies (&?;). 1. The sum of seven times ten;
seventy units or objects.

2. A symbol representing seventy units, as 70, or lxx.

The Seventy, the translators of the Greek version of the Old Testament
called the Septuagint. See Septuagint.

Sev`en*ty-four" (?), n. (Naut.) A naval vessel carrying seventy-four
guns.

Sev"en-up`, n. The game of cards called also all fours, and old sledge.
[U. S.]

Sev"er (?), v. t. [imp. &. p. p. Severed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Severing.] [OF. sevrer, severer, to separate, F. sevrer to wean, fr. L.
separare. See Separate, and cf. Several.] 1. To separate, as one from
another; to cut off from something; to divide; to part in any way,
especially by violence, as by cutting, rending, etc.; as, to sever the
head from the body.

    The angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the
    just.


Matt. xiii. 49.

2. To cut or break open or apart; to divide into parts; to cut through;
to disjoin; as, to sever the arm or leg.

    Our state can not be severed; we are one.


Milton.

3. To keep distinct or apart; to except; to exempt.

    I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people
    dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there.


Ex. viii. 22.

4. (Law) To disunite; to disconnect; to terminate; as, to sever an
estate in joint tenancy. Blackstone.

Sev"er, v. i. 1. To suffer disjunction; to be parted, or rent asunder;
to be separated; to part; to separate. Shak.

2. To make a separation or distinction; to distinguish.

    The Lord shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of
    Egypt.


Ex. ix. 4.

    They claimed the right of severing in their challenge.


Macaulay.

Sev"er*a*ble (?), a. Capable of being severed. Encyc. Dict.

Sev"er*al (?), a. [OF., fr. LL. separalis, fr. L. separ separate,
different. See Sever, Separate.] 1. Separate; distinct; particular;
single.

    Each several ship a victory did gain.


Dryden.

    Each might his several province well command, Would all but stoop
    to what they understand.


Pope.

2. Diverse; different; various. Spenser.

    Habits and faculties, several, and to be distinguished.


Bacon.

    Four several armies to the field are led.


Dryden.

3. Consisting of a number more than two, but not very many; divers;
sundry; as, several persons were present when the event took place.

Sev"er*al, adv. By itself; severally. [Obs.]

    Every kind of thing is laid up several in barns or storehoudses.


Robynson (More's Utopia).

Sev"er*al, n. 1. Each particular taken singly; an item; a detail; an
individual. [Obs.]

    There was not time enough to hear . . . The severals.


Shak.

2. Persons oe objects, more than two, but not very many.

    Several of them neither rose from any conspicuous family, nor left
    any behind them.


Addison.

3. An inclosed or separate place; inclosure. [Obs.]

    They had their several for heathen nations, their several for the
    people of their own nation.


Hooker.

In several, in a state of separation. [R.] "Where pastures in several
be." Tusser.

Sev`er*al"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Severalities (&?;). Each particular taken
singly; distinction. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

Sev"er*al*ize (?), v. t. To distinguish. [Obs.]

Sev"er*al*ly, adv. Separately; distinctly; apart from others;
individually.

    There must be an auditor to check and revise each severally by
    itself.


De Quincey.

Sev"er*al*ty (?), n. A state of separation from the rest, or from all
others; a holding by individual right.

    Forests which had never been owned in severalty.


Bancroft.

Estate in severalty (Law), an estate which the tenant holds in his own
right, without being joined in interest with any other person; --
distinguished from joint tenancy, coparcenary, and common. Blackstone.

Sev"er*ance (?), n. 1. The act of severing, or the state of being
severed; partition; separation. Milman.

2. (Law) The act of dividing; the singling or severing of two or more
that join, or are joined, in one writ; the putting in several or
separate pleas or answers by two or more disjointly; the destruction of
the unity of interest in a joint estate. Bouvier.

Se*vere" (?), a. [Compar. Severer (?); superl. Severest.] [L. severus;
perhaps akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?; awe, &?;&?;&?; revered, holy, solemn,
Goth. swikns innocent, chaste: cf. F. sévère. Cf. Asseverate,
Persevere.] 1. Serious in feeeling or manner; sedate; grave; austere;
not light, lively, or cheerful.

    Your looks alter, as your subject does, From kind to fierce, from
    wanton to severe.


Waller.

2. Very strict in judgment, discipline, or government; harsh; not mild
or indulgent; rigorous; as, severe criticism; severe punishment.
"Custody severe." Milton.

    Come! you are too severe a moraler.


Shak.

    Let your zeal, if it must be expressed in anger, be always more
    severe against thyself than against others.


Jer. Taylor.

3. Rigidly methodical, or adherent to rule or principle; exactly
conformed to a standard; not allowing or employing unneccessary
ornament, amplification, etc.; strict; -- said of style, argument, etc.
"Restrained by reason and severe principles." Jer. Taylor.

    The Latin, a most severe and compendious language.


Dryden.

4. Sharp; afflictive; distressing; violent; extreme; as, severe pain,
anguish, fortune; severe cold.

5. Difficult to be endured; exact; critical; rigorous; as, a severe
test.

Syn. -- Strict; grave; austere; stern; morose; rigid; exact; rigorous;
hard; rough; harsh; censorious; tart; acrimonious; sarcastic;
satirical; cutting; biting; keen; bitter; cruel. See Strict.

-- Se*vere"ly, adv. -- Se*vere"ness, n.

Se*ver"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Severities (#). [L. severitas: cf. F.
sévérité.] The quality or state of being severe. Specifically: --

(a) Gravity or austerity; extreme strictness; rigor; harshness; as, the
severity of a reprimand or a reproof; severity of discipline or
government; severity of penalties. "Strict age, and sour severity."
Milton.

(b) The quality or power of distressing or paining; extreme degree;
extremity; intensity; inclemency; as, the severity of pain or anguish;
the severity of cold or heat; the severity of the winter.

(c) Harshness; cruel treatment; sharpness of punishment; as, severity
practiced on prisoners of war.

(d) Exactness; rigorousness; strictness; as, the severity of a test.

    Confining myself to the severity of truth.


Dryden.

Sev"er*y (?), n. [Prob. corrupted fr. ciborium. Oxf. Gloss.] (Arch.) A
bay or compartment of a vaulted ceiling. [Written also civery.]

Sev`o*ca"tion (?), n. [L. sevocare, sevocatum, to call aside.] A
calling aside. [Obs.]

Sè"vres blue` (?). A very light blue.

Sè"vres ware` (?). Porcelain manufactured at Sèvres, France, ecpecially
in the national factory situated there.

Sew (?), n.[OE. See Sewer household officer.] Juice; gravy; a seasoned
dish; a delicacy. [Obs.] Gower.

    I will not tell of their strange sewes.


Chaucer.

Sew, v. t. [See Sue to follow.] To follow; to pursue; to sue. [Obs.]
Chaucer. Spenser.

Sew (?), v. t. [imp. Sewed (?); p. p. Sewed, rarely Sewn (&?;); p. pr.
& vb. n. Sewing.] [OE. sewen, sowen, AS. siówian, swian; akin to OHG.
siuwan, Icel. s&?;ja, Sw. sy, Dan. sye, Goth. siujan, Lith. siuti,
Russ, shite, L. ssuere, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, Skr. siv. &radic;156. Cf.
Seam a suture, Suture.] 1. To unite or fasten together by stitches, as
with a needle and thread.

    No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment.


Mark ii. 21.

2. To close or stop by ssewing; -- often with up; as, to sew up a rip.

3. To inclose by sewing; -- sometimes with up; as, to sew money in a
bag.

Sew, v. i. To practice sewing; to work with needle and thread.

Sew (?), v. t. [&radic;151 b. See Sewer a drain.] To drain, as a pond,
for taking the fish. [Obs.] Tusser.

Sew"age (?), n. 1. The contents of a sewer or drain; refuse liquids or
matter carried off by sewers

2. Sewerage, 2.

Sewe (?), v. i. To perform the duties of a sewer. See 3d Sewer. [Obs.]

Sew"el (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] A scarecrow, generally made of
feathers tied to a string, hung up to prevent deer from breaking into a
place. Halliwell.

Se*wel"lel (?), n. [Of American Indian origin.] (Zoöl.) A peculiar
gregarious burrowing rodent (Haplodon rufus), native of the coast
region of the Northwestern United States. It somewhat resembles a
muskrat or marmot, but has only a rudimentary tail. Its head is broad,
its eyes are small and its fur is brownish above, gray beneath. It
constitutes the family Haplodontidæ. Called also boomer, showt'l, and
mountain beaver.

<! p. 1320 !>

Sew"en (?), n. (Zoöl.) A British trout usually regarded as a variety
(var. Cambricus) of the salmon trout.

Sew"er (?), n. 1. One who sews, or stitches.

2. (Zoöl.) A small tortricid moth whose larva sews together the edges
of a leaf by means of silk; as, the apple-leaf sewer (Phoxopteris
nubeculana)

Sew"er (?), n. [OF. sewiere, seuwiere, ultimately fr. L. ex out + a
derivative of aqua water; cf. OF. essevour a drain, essever, esseuwer,
essiaver, to cause to flow, to drain, to flow, LL. exaquatorium a
channel through which water runs off. Cf. Ewer, Aquarium.] A drain or
passage to carry off water and filth under ground; a subterraneous
channel, particularly in cities.

Sew"er, n. [Cf. OE. assewer, and asseour, OF. asseour, F. asseoir to
seat, to set, L. assidere to sit by; ad + sedere to sit (cf. Sit); or
cf. OE. sew pottage, sauce, boiled meat, AS. seáw juice, Skr. su to
press out.] Formerly, an upper servant, or household officer, who set
on and removed the dishes at a feast, and who also brought water for
the hands of the guests.

    Then the sewer Poured water from a great and golden ewer, That from
    their hands to a silver caldron ran.


Chapman.

Sew"er*age (?), n. 1. The construction of a sewer or sewers.

2. The system of sewers in a city, town, etc.; the general drainage of
a city or town by means of sewers.

3. The material collected in, and discharged by, sewers. [In this sense
sewage is preferable and common.]

Sew"in (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sewen.

Sew"ing (?), n. 1. The act or occupation of one who sews.

2. That which is sewed with the needle.

Sewing horse (Harness making), a clamp, operated by the foot, for
holding pieces of leather while being sewed. -- Sewing machine, a
machine for sewing or stitching. -- Sewing press, or Sewing table
(Bookbinding), a fixture or table having a frame in which are held the
cords to which the back edges of folded sheets are sewed to form a
book.

Sew"ster (?), n. A seamstress. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Sex- (?). [L. sex six. See Six.] A combining form meaning six; as,
sexdigitism; sexennial.

Sex, n. [L. sexus: cf. F. sexe.] 1. The distinguishing peculiarity of
male or female in both animals and plants; the physical difference
between male and female; the assemblage of properties or qualities by
which male is distinguished from female.

2. One of the two divisions of organic beings formed on the distinction
of male and female.

3. (Bot.) (a) The capability in plants of fertilizing or of being
fertilized; as, staminate and pistillate flowers are of opposite sexes.
(b) One of the groups founded on this distinction.

The sex, the female sex; women, in general.

Sex`a*ge*na"ri*an (?), n. [See Sexagenary.] A person who is sixty years
old.

Sex*ag"e*na*ry (?), a. [L. sexagenarius, fr. sexageni sixty each, akin
to sexaginta sixty, sex six: cf. sexagénaire. See Six.] Pertaining to,
or designating, the number sixty; poceeding by sixties; sixty years
old.

Sexagenary arithmetic. See under Sexagesimal. -- Sexagenary, or
Sexagesimal, scale (Math.), a scale of numbers in which the modulus is
sixty. It is used in treating the divisions of the circle.

Sex*ag"e*na*ry, n. 1. Something composed of sixty parts or divisions.

2. A sexagenarian. Sir W. Scott.

||Sex`a*ges"i*ma (?), n. [L., fem. of sexagesimus sixtieth, fr.
||sexaginta sixty.] (Eccl.) The second Sunday before Lent; -- so called
||as being about the sixtieth day before Easter.

Sex`a*ges"i*mal (?), a. [Cf. F. sexagésimal.] Pertaining to, or founded
on, the number sixty.

Sexagesimal fractions or numbers (Arith. & Alg.), those fractions whose
denominators are some power of sixty; as, , , ; -- called also
astronomical fractions, because formerly there were no others used in
astronomical calculations. -- Sexagesimal, or Sexagenary, arithmetic,
the method of computing by the sexagenary scale, or by sixties. --
Sexagesimal scale (Math.), the sexagenary scale.

Sex`a*ges"i*mal, n. A sexagesimal fraction.

Sex"an`gle (?), n. [L. sexangulus sexangular; sex six + angulus angle:
cf. F. sexangle. Cf. Hexangular.] (Geom.) A hexagon. [R.] Hutton.

{ Sex"an`gled (?), Sex*an"gu*lar (?) } a. [Cf. F. sexangulaire.] Having
six angles; hexagonal. [R.] Dryden.

Sex*an"gu*lar*ly, adv. Hexagonally. [R.]

Sex*av"a*lent (?), a. See Sexivalent. [R.]

Sex*dig"it*ism (?), n. [Sex- + digit.] The state of having six fingers
on a hand, or six toes on a foot.

Sex*dig"it*ist, n. One who has six fingers on a hand, or six toes on a
foot.

Sexed (?), a. Belonging to sex; having sex; distinctively male of
female; as, the sexed condition.

Sex"e*na*ry (?), a. Proceeding by sixes; sextuple; -- applied
especially to a system of arithmetical computation in which the base is
six.

Sex*en"ni*al (?), a. [L. sexennium a period of six years, sexennis of
six years; sex six + annus a year. See Six, and Annual.] Lasting six
years, or happening once in six years. -- n. A sexennial event.

Sex*en"ni*al*ly, adv. Once in six years.

{ Sex"fid (?), Sex"i*fid (?), } a. [Sex- + root of L. findere to split:
cf. F. sexfide.] (Bot.) Six-cleft; as, a sexfid calyx or nectary.

Sex`i*syl*lab"ic (?), a. [Sex- + syllabic.] Having six syllables.
Emerson.

Sex"i*syl`la*ble (?), n. [Sex- + syllable.] A word of six syllables.

Sex*iv"a*lent (?), a. [Sex- + L. valens, p. pr. See Valence.] (hem.)
Hexavalent. [R.]

Sex"less (?), a. Having no sex.

Sex`loc"u*lar (?), a. [Sex- + locular: cf. F. sexloculaire.] (Bot.)
Having six cells for seeds; six-celled; as, a sexlocular pericarp.

Sex"ly (?), a. Pertaining to sex. [R.]

    Should I ascribe any of these things unto myself or my sexly
    weakness, I were not worthy to live.


Queen Elizabeth.

Sex*ra"di*ate (?), a. [Sex- + radiate.] (Zoöl.) Having six rays; --
said of certain sponge spicules. See Illust. of Spicule.

Sext (?), n. [L. sexta, fem. of sextus sixtt, fr. sex six: cf. F.
sexte.] (R.C.Ch.) (a) The office for the sixth canonical hour, being a
part of the Breviary. (b) The sixth book of the decretals, added by
Pope Boniface VIII.

Sex"tain, n. [L. sextus sixth, fr. sex six: cf. It. sestina.] (Pros.) A
stanza of six lines; a sestine.

||Sex"tans (?), n. [L. See Sextant.] 1. (Rom. Antiq.) A Roman coin, the
||sixth part of an as.

2. (Astron.) A constellation on the equator south of Leo; the Sextant.

Sex"tant (?), n. [L. sextans, -antis, the sixth part of an as, fr.
sextus sixth, sex six. See Six.] 1. (Math.) The sixth part of a circle.

2. An instrument for measuring angular distances between objects, --
used esp. at sea, for ascertaining the latitude and longitude. It is
constructed on the same optical principle as Hadley's quadrant, but
usually of metal, with a nicer graduation, telescopic sight, and its
arc the sixth, and sometimes the third, part of a circle. See Quadrant.

3. (Astron.) The constellation Sextans.

Box sextant, a small sextant inclosed in a cylindrical case to make it
more portable.

Sex"ta*ry (?), n.; pl. Sextaries (#). [L. sextarius the sixth part of a
measure, weight, etc., fr. sextus sixth, sex six.] (Rom. Antiq.) An
ancient Roman liquid and dry measure, about equal to an English pint.

Sex"ta*ry (?), n. [For sextonry.] A sacristy. [Obs.]

{ Sex*tet" (?), Sex*tet"to (?), } n. (Mus.) See Sestet.

Sex"teyn (?), n. A sacristan. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sex"tic (?), a. [L. sextus sixth.] (Math.) Of the sixth degree or
order. -- n. (Alg.) A quantic of the sixth degree.

Sex"tile (?), a. [F. sextil, fr. L. sextus the sixth, from sex six. See
Six.] (Astrol.) Measured by sixty degrees; fixed or indicated by a
distance of sixty degrees. Glanvill.

Sex"tile, n. [Cf. F. aspect sextil.] (Astrol.) The aspect or position
of two planets when distant from each other sixty degrees, or two
signs. This position is marked thus: &8star;. Hutton.

Sex*til"lion (?), n. [Formed (in imitation of million) fr. L. sextus
sixth, sex six: cf. F. sextilion.] According to the method of
numeration (which is followed also in the United States), the number
expressed by a unit with twenty-one ciphers annexed. According to the
English method, a million raised to the sixth power, or the number
expressed by a unit with thirty-six ciphers annexed. See Numeration.

Sex"to (?), n.; pl. Sextos (#). [L. sextus sixth.] A book consisting of
sheets each of which is folded into six leaves.

Sex`to*dec"i*mo (?), a. [L. sextus- decimus the sixteenth; sextus the
sixth (fr. sex six) + decimus the tenth, from decem ten. See - mo.]
Having sixteen leaves to a sheet; of, or equal to, the size of one fold
of a sheet of printing paper when folded so as to make sixteen leaves,
or thirty-two pages; as, a sextodecimo volume.

Sex`to*dec"imo, n.; pl. Sextodecimos (&?;). A book composed of sheets
each of which is folded into sixteen leaves; hence, indicating, more or
less definitely, a size of a book; -- usually written 16mo, or 16°.

Sex"to*let (?), n. (Mus.) A double triplet; a group of six equal notes
played in the time of four.

Sex"ton (?), n. [OE. sextein, contr. fr. sacristan.] An under officer
of a church, whose business is to take care of the church building and
the vessels, vestments, etc., belonging to the church, to attend on the
officiating clergyman, and to perform other duties pertaining to the
church, such as to dig graves, ring the bell, etc.

Sexton beetle (Zoöl.), a burying beetle.

Sex"ton*ess, n. A female sexton; a sexton's wife.

Sex"ton*ry (?), n. Sextonship. [Obs.] Ld. Bernes.

Sex"ton*ship, n. The office of a sexton. Swift.

Sex"try (?), n. See Sacristy. [Obs.]

Sex"tu*ple (?), a. [Formed (in imitation of quadruple) fr. L. sextus
sixth: cf. F. sextuple.] 1. Six times as much; sixfold.

2. (Mus.) Divisible by six; having six beats; as, sixtuple measure.

Sex"u*al (?), a. [L. sexualis, fr. sexus sex: cf. F. sexuel.] Of or
pertaining to sex, or the sexes; distinguishing sex; peculiar to the
distinction and office of male or female; relating to the distinctive
genital organs of the sexes; proceeding from, or based upon, sex; as,
sexual characteristics; sexual intercourse, connection, or commerce;
sexual desire; sexual diseases; sexual generation.

Sexual dimorphism (Biol.), the condition of having one of the sexes
existing in two forms, or varieties, differing in color, size, etc., as
in many species of butterflies which have two kinds of females. --
Sexual method (Bot.), a method of classification proposed by Linnæus,
founded mainly on difference in number and position of the stamens and
pistils of plants. -- Sexual selection (Biol.), the selective
preference of one sex for certain characteristics in the other, such as
bright colors, musical notes, etc.; also, the selection which results
from certain individuals of one sex having more opportunities of
pairing with the other sex, on account of greater activity, strength,
courage, etc.; applied likewise to that kind of evolution which results
from such sexual preferences. Darwin.

    In these cases, therefore, natural selection seems to have acted
    independently of sexual selection.


A. R. Wallace.

Sex"u*al*ist, n. (Bot.) One who classifies plants by the sexual method
of Linnæus.

Sex`u*al"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being distinguished by
sex. Lindley.

Sex"u*al*ize (?), v. t. To attribute sex to.

Sex"u*al*ly, adv. In a sexual manner or relation.

{ Sey (?), Seyh (?) }, obs. imp. sing. & 2d pers. pl. of See. Chaucer.

{ Seye (?), Seyen (?) }, obs. imp. pl. & p. p. of See.

Seynd (?), obs. p. p. of Senge, to singe.  Chaucer.

Seynt (?), n. A gridle. See 1st Seint. [Obs.]

{ ||Sfor*zan"do (?), ||Sfor*za"to (?), } a. [It. sforzando, p. pr., and
sforzato, p. p. of sforzare to force.] (Mus.) Forcing or forced; -- a
direction placed over a note, to signify that it must be executed with
peculiar emphasis and force; -- marked fz (an abbreviation of
forzando), sf, sfz, or &?;.

||Sfu*ma"to (?), a. [It.] (Paint.) Having vague outlines, and colors
||and shades so mingled as to give a misty appearance; -- said of a
||painting.

||Sgraf*fi"to (?), a. [It.] (Paint.) Scratched; -- said of decorative
||painting of a certain style, in which a white overland surface is cut
||or scratched through, so as to form the design from a dark ground
||underneath.

Shab (?), n. [OE. shabbe, AS. sc&?;b. See Scab.] The itch in animals;
also, a scab. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Shab, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shabbed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shabbing.] [See
Scab, 3.] To play mean tricks; to act shabbily. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Shab, v. t. To scratch; to rub. [Obs.] Farquhar.

Shab"bed (?), a. Shabby. [Obs.] Wood.

Shab"bi*ly (?), adv. In a shabby manner.

Shab"bi*ness, n. The quality or state of being sghabby.

{ Shab"ble (?), Shab"ble }, n.[Cf. D. sabel, and G. säbel.] A kind of
crooked sword or hanger. [Scot.]

Shab"by (?), a. [Compar. Shabbier (?); superl. Shabbiest.] [See Shab,
n., Scabby, and Scab.] 1. Torn or worn to rage; poor; mean; ragged.

    Wearing shabby coats and dirty shirts.


Macaulay.

2. Clothed with ragged, much worn, or soiled garments. "The dean was so
shabby." Swift.

3. Mean; paltry; despicable; as, shabby treatment. "Very shabby
fellows." Clarendon.

||Shab"rack (?), n. [Turk. tshprk, whence F. chabraque, G. shabracke.]
||(Mil.) The saddlecloth or housing of a cavalry horse.

Shack (?), v. t. [Prov. E., to shake, to shed. See Shake.] 1. To shed
or fall, as corn or grain at harvest. [Prov. Eng.] Grose.

2. To feed in stubble, or upon waste corn. [Prov. Eng.]

3. To wander as a vagabond or a tramp. [Prev.Eng.]

Shack, n. [Cf. Scot. shag refuse of barley or oats.] 1. The grain left
after harvest or gleaning; also, nuts which have fallen to the ground.
[Prov. Eng.]

2. Liberty of winter pasturage. [Prov. Eng.]

3. A shiftless fellow; a low, itinerant beggar; a vagabond; a tramp.
[Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U.S.] Forby.

    All the poor old shacks about the town found a friend in Deacon
    Marble.


H. W. Beecher.

Common of shack (Eng.Law), the right of persons occupying lands lying
together in the same common field to turn out their cattle to range in
it after harvest. Cowell.

Shack"a*to*ry (?), n. A hound. [Obs.]

Shac"kle (?), n. Stubble. [Prov. Eng.] Pegge.

Shac"kle, n. [Generally used in the plural.] [OE. schakkyll, schakle,
AS. scacul, sceacul, a shackle, fr. scacan to shake; cf. D. schakel a
link of a chain, a mesh, Icel. skökull the pole of a cart. See Shake.]
1. Something which confines the legs or arms so as to prevent their
free motion; specifically, a ring or band inclosing the ankle or wrist,
and fastened to a similar shackle on the other leg or arm, or to
something else, by a chain or a strap; a gyve; a fetter.

    His shackles empty left; himself escaped clean.


Spenser.

2. Hence, that which checks or prevents free action.

    His very will seems to be in bonds and shackles.


South.

3. A fetterlike band worn as an ornament.

    Most of the men and women . . . had all earrings made of gold, and
    gold shackles about their legs and arms.


Dampier.

4. A link or loop, as in a chain, fitted with a movable bolt, so that
the parts can be separated, or the loop removed; a clevis.

5. A link for connecting railroad cars; -- called also drawlink,
draglink, etc.

6. The hinged and curved bar of a padlock, by which it is hung to the
staple. Knight.

Shackle joint (Anat.), a joint formed by a bony ring passing through a
hole in a bone, as at the bases of spines in some fishes.

<! p. 1321 !>

Shac"kle (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shackled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shackling.] 1. To tie or confine the limbs of, so as to prevent free
motion; to bind with shackles; to fetter; to chain.

    To lead him shackled, and exposed to scorn Of gathering crowds, the
    Britons' boasted chief.


J. Philips.

2. Figuratively: To bind or confine so as to prevent or embarrass
action; to impede; to cumber.

    Shackled by her devotion to the king, she seldom could pursue that
    object.


Walpole.

3. To join by a link or chain, as railroad cars. [U. S.]

Shackle bar, the coupling between a locomotive and its tender. [U.S.]
-- Shackle bolt, a shackle. Sir W. Scott.

Shack"lock` (?), n. A sort of shackle. [Obs.]

Shack"ly, a. Shaky; rickety. [Colloq. U. S.]

Shad (shd), n. sing. & pl. [AS. sceadda a kind of fish, akin to Prov.
G. schade; cf. Ir. & Gael. sgadan a herring, W. ysgadan herrings; all
perhaps akin to E. skate a fish.] (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of
food fishes of the Herring family. The American species (Clupea
sapidissima), which is abundant on the Atlantic coast and ascends the
larger rivers in spring to spawn, is an important market fish. The
European allice shad, or alose (C. alosa), and the twaite shad. (C.
finta), are less important species. [Written also chad.]

The name is loosely applied, also, to several other fishes, as the
gizzard shad (see under Gizzard), called also mud shad, white-eyed
shad, and winter shad.

Hardboaded, or Yellow-tailed, shad, the menhaden. -- Hickory, or
Tailor, shad, the mattowacca. -- Long-boned shad, one of several
species of important food fishes of the Bermudas and the West Indies,
of the genus Gerres. -- Shad bush (Bot.), a name given to the North
American shrubs or small trees of the rosaceous genus Amelanchier (A.
Canadensis, and A. alnifolia) Their white racemose blossoms open in
April or May, when the shad appear, and the edible berries (pomes)
ripen in June or July, whence they are called Juneberries. The plant is
also called service tree, and Juneberry. -- Shad frog, an American
spotted frog (Rana halecina); - - so called because it usually appears
at the time when the shad begin to run in the rivers. -- Trout shad,
the squeteague. -- White shad, the common shad.

Shad"bird` (shd"brd), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The American, or Wilson's, snipe.
See under Snipe. So called because it appears at the same time as the
shad. (b) The common European sandpiper. [Prov. Eng.]

Shadd (shd), n. (Mining.) Rounded stones containing tin ore, lying at
the surface of the ground, and indicating a vein. Raymond.

Shad"de (?), obs. imp. of Shed. Chaucer.

Shad"dock (?), n. [Said to be so called from a Captain Shaddock, who
first brought this fruit from the East Indies.] (Bot.) A tree (Citrus
decumana) and its fruit, which is a large species of orange; -- called
also forbidden fruit, and pompelmous.

Shade (shd), n. [OE. shade, shadewe, schadewe, AS. sceadu, scead; akin
to OS. skado, D. schaduw, OHG. scato, (gen. scatewes), G. schatten,
Goth. skadus, Ir. & Gael. sgath, and probably to Gr. sko`tos darkness.
&radic;162. Cf. Shadow, Shed a hat.] 1. Comparative obscurity owing to
interception or interruption of the rays of light; partial darkness
caused by the intervention of something between the space contemplated
and the source of light.

Shade differs from shadow as it implies no particular form or definite
limit; whereas a shadow represents in form the object which intercepts
the light. When we speak of the shade of a tree, we have no reference
to its form; but when we speak of measuring a pyramid or other object
by its shadow, we have reference to its form and extent.

2. Darkness; obscurity; -- often in the plural.

    The shades of night were falling fast.


Longfellow.

3. An obscure place; a spot not exposed to light; hence, a secluded
retreat.

    Let us seek out some desolate shade, and there Weep our sad bosoms
    empty.


Shak.

4. That which intercepts, or shelters from, light or the direct rays of
the sun; hence, also, that which protects from heat or currents of air;
a screen; protection; shelter; cover; as, a lamp shade.

    The Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.


Ps. cxxi. 5.

    Sleep under a fresh tree's shade.


Shak.

    Let the arched knife well sharpened now assail the spreading shades
    of vegetables.


J. Philips.

5. Shadow. [Poetic.]

    Envy will merit, as its shade, pursue.


Pope.

6. The soul after its separation from the body; -- so called because
the ancients it to be perceptible to the sight, though not to the
touch; a spirit; a ghost; as, the shades of departed heroes.

    Swift as thought the flitting shade Thro' air his momentary journey
    made.


Dryden.

7. (Painting, Drawing, etc.) The darker portion of a picture; a less
illuminated part. See Def. 1, above.

8. Degree or variation of color, as darker or lighter, stronger or
paler; as, a delicate shade of pink.

    White, red, yellow, blue, with their several degrees, or shades and
    mixtures, as green only in by the eyes.


Locke.

9. A minute difference or variation, as of thought, belief, expression,
etc.; also, the quality or degree of anything which is distinguished
from others similar by slight differences; as, the shades of meaning in
synonyms.

    New shades and combinations of thought.


De Quincey.

    Every shade of religious and political opinion has its own
    headquarters.


Macaulay.

The Shades, the Nether World; the supposed abode of souls after leaving
the body.

Shade (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shaded; p. pr. & vb. n. Shading.] 1. To
shelter or screen by intercepting the rays of light; to keep off
illumination from. Milton.

    I went to crop the sylvan scenes, And shade our altars with their
    leafy greens.


Dryden.

2. To shelter; to cover from injury; to protect; to screen; to hide;
as, to shade one's eyes.

    Ere in our own house I do shade my head.


Shak.

3. To obscure; to dim the brightness of.

    Thou shad'st The full blaze of thy beams.


Milton.

4. To pain in obscure colors; to darken.

5. To mark with gradations of light or color.

6. To present a shadow or image of; to shadow forth; to represent.
[Obs.]

    [The goddess] in her person cunningly did shade That part of
    Justice which is Equity.


Spenser.

Shade"ful (?), a. Full of shade; shady.

Shade"less, a. Being without shade; not shaded.

Shad"er (?), n. One who, or that which, shades.

Shad"i*ly (?), adv. In a shady manner.

Shad"i*ness, n. Quality or state of being shady.

Shad"ing, n. 1. Act or process of making a shade.

2. That filling up which represents the effect of more or less
darkness, expressing rotundity, projection, etc., in a picture or a
drawing.

||Sha*doof" (sh*df"), n. [Ar. shdf.] A machine, resembling a well
||sweep, used in Egypt for raising water from the Nile for irrigation.

Shad"ow (shd"), n. [Originally the same word as shade. &radic;162. See
Shade.] 1. Shade within defined limits; obscurity or deprivation of
light, apparent on a surface, and representing the form of the body
which intercepts the rays of light; as, the shadow of a man, of a tree,
or of a tower. See the Note under Shade, n., 1.

2. Darkness; shade; obscurity.

    Night's sable shadows from the ocean rise.


Denham.

3. A shaded place; shelter; protection; security.

    In secret shadow from the sunny ray, On a sweet bed of lilies
    softly laid.


Spenser.

4. A reflected image, as in a mirror or in water. Shak.

5. That which follows or attends a person or thing like a shadow; an
inseparable companion; hence, an obsequious follower.

    Sin and her shadow Death.


Milton.

6. A spirit; a ghost; a shade; a phantom. "Hence, horrible shadow!"
Shak.

7. An imperfect and faint representation; adumbration; indistinct
image; dim bodying forth; hence, mystical representation; type.

    The law having a shadow of good things to come.


Heb. x. 1.

    [Types] and shadows of that destined seed.


Milton.

8. A small degree; a shade. "No variableness, neither shadow of
turning." James i. 17.

9. An uninvited guest coming with one who is invited. [A Latinism]
Nares.

    I must not have my board pastered with shadows That under other
    men's protection break in Without invitement.


Massinger.

Shadow of death, darkness or gloom like that caused by the presence or
the impending of death. Ps. xxiii. 4.

Shad"ow, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shadowed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shadowing.]
[OE. shadowen, AS. sceadwian. See adow, n.] 1. To cut off light from;
to put in shade; to shade; to throw a shadow upon; to overspead with
obscurity.

    The warlike elf much wondered at this tree, So fair and great, that
    shadowed all the ground.


Spenser.

2. To conceal; to hide; to screen. [R.]

    Let every soldier hew him down a bough. And bear't before him;
    thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host.


Shak.

3. To protect; to shelter from danger; to shroud.

    Shadowing their right under your wings of war.


Shak.

4. To mark with gradations of light or color; to shade.

5. To represent faintly or imperfectly; to adumbrate; hence, to
represent typically.

    Augustus is shadowed in the person of Æneas.


Dryden.

6. To cloud; to darken; to cast a gloom over.

    The shadowed livery of the burnished sun.


Shak.

    Why sad? I must not see the face O love thus shadowed.


Beau. & Fl.

7. To attend as closely as a shadow; to follow and watch closely,
especially in a secret or unobserved manner; as, a detective shadows a
criminal.

Shad"ow*i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being shadowy.

Shad"ow*ing, n. 1. Shade, or gradation of light and color; shading.
Feltham.

2. A faint representation; an adumbration.

    There are . . . in savage theology shadowings, quaint or majestic,
    of the conception of a Supreme Deity.


Tylor.

Shad"ow*ish, a. Shadowy; vague. [Obs.] Hooker.

Shad"ow*less, a. Having no shadow.

Shad"ow*y (?), a. 1. Full of shade or shadows; causing shade or shadow.
"Shadowy verdure." Fenton.

    This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods.


Shak.

2. Hence, dark; obscure; gloomy; dim. "The shadowy past." Longfellow.

3. Not brightly luminous; faintly light.

    The moon . . . with more pleasing light, Shadowy sets off the face
    things.


Milton.

4. Faintly representative; hence, typical.

    From shadowy types to truth, from flesh to spirit.


Milton.

5. Unsubstantial; unreal; as, shadowy honor.

    Milton has brought into his poems two actors of a shadowy and
    fictitious nature, in the persons of Sin and Death.


Addison.

Sha"drach (?), n. (Metal.) A mass of iron on which the operation of
smelting has failed of its intended effect; -- so called from Shadrach,
one of the three Hebrews who came forth unharmed from the fiery furnace
of Nebuchadnezzar. (See Dan. iii. 26, 27.)

Shad"-spir`it (?), n. See Shadbird (a)

Shad"-wait`er (?), n. (Zoöl.) A lake whitefish; the roundfish. See
Roundfish.

Shad"y (?), a. [Compar. Shadier (?); superl. Shadiest.] 1. Abounding in
shade or shades; overspread with shade; causing shade.

    The shady trees cover him with their shadow.


Job. xl. 22.

    And Amaryllis fills the shady groves.


Dryden.

2. Sheltered from the glare of light or sultry heat.

    Cast it also that you may have rooms shady for summer and warm for
    winter.


Bacon.

3. Of or pertaining to shade or darkness; hence, unfit to be seen or
known; equivocal; dubious or corrupt. [Colloq.] "A shady business."
London Sat. Rev.

    Shady characters, disreputable, criminal.


London Spectator.

On the shady side of, on the thither side of; as, on the shady side of
fifty; that is, more than fifty. [Colloq.] -- To keep shady, to stay in
concealment; also, to be reticent. [Slang]

Shaf"fle (?), v. i. [See Shuffle.] To hobble or limp; to shuffle. [Obs.
or Prov. Eng.]

Shaf"fler (?), n. A hobbler; one who limps; a shuffer. [Obs. or Prov.
Eng.]

Sha"fi*ite (?), n. A member of one of the four sects of the Sunnites,
or Orthodox Mohammedans; -- so called from its founder, Mohammed
al-Shafeï.

Shaft (?), n. [OE. shaft, schaft, AS. sceaft; akin to D. schacht, OHG.
scaft, G. schaft, Dan. & Sw. skaft handle, haft, Icel. skapt, and
probably to L. scapus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;&?;, a staff.
Probably originally, a shaven or smoothed rod. Cf. Scape, Scepter,
Shave.] 1. The slender, smooth stem of an arrow; hence, an arrow.

    His sleep, his meat, his drink, is him bereft, That lean he wax,
    and dry as is a shaft.


Chaucer.

    A shaft hath three principal parts, the stele [stale], the
    feathers, and the head.


Ascham.

2. The long handle of a spear or similar weapon; hence, the weapon
itself; (Fig.) anything regarded as a shaft to be thrown or darted; as,
shafts of light.

    And the thunder, Winged with red lightning and impetuous rage,
    Perhaps hath spent his shafts.


Milton.

    Some kinds of literary pursuits . . . have been attacked with all
    the shafts of ridicule.


V. Knox.

3. That which resembles in some degree the stem or handle of an arrow
or a spear; a long, slender part, especially when cylindrical.
Specifically: (a) (Bot.) The trunk, stem, or stalk of a plant. (b)
(Zoöl.) The stem or midrib of a feather. See Illust. of Feather. (c)
The pole, or tongue, of a vehicle; also, a thill. (d) The part of a
candlestick which supports its branches.

    Thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold . . . his shaft, and his
    branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers, shall be of the
    same.


Ex. xxv. 31.

(e) The handle or helve of certain tools, instruments, etc., as a
hammer, a whip, etc. (f) A pole, especially a Maypole. [Obs.] Stow. (g)
(Arch.) The body of a column; the cylindrical pillar between the
capital and base (see Illust. of Column). Also, the part of a chimney
above the roof. Also, the spire of a steeple. [Obs. or R.] Gwilt. (h) A
column, an obelisk, or other spire-shaped or columnar monument.

    Bid time and nature gently spare The shaft we raise to thee.


Emerson.

(i) (Weaving) A rod at the end of a heddle. (j) (Mach.) A solid or
hollow cylinder or bar, having one or more journals on which it rests
and revolves, and intended to carry one or more wheels or other
revolving parts and to transmit power or motion; as, the shaft of a
steam engine. See Illust. of Countershaft.

4. (Zoöl.) A humming bird (Thaumastura cora) having two of the tail
feathers next to the middle ones very long in the male; -- called also
cora humming bird.

5. [Cf. G. schacht.] (Mining) A well-like excavation in the earth,
perpendicular or nearly so, made for reaching and raising ore, for
raising water, etc.

6. A long passage for the admission or outlet of air; an air shaft.

7. The chamber of a blast furnace.

Line shaft (Mach.), a main shaft of considerable length, in a shop or
factory, usually bearing a number of pulleys by which machines are
driven, commonly by means of countershafts; -- called also line, or
main line. - - Shaft alley (Naut.), a passage extending from the engine
room to the stern, and containing the propeller shaft. -- Shaft furnace
(Metal.), a furnace, in the form of a chimney, which is charged at the
top and tapped at the bottom.

Shaft"ed, a. 1. Furnished with a shaft, or with shafts; as, a shafted
arch.

2. (Her.) Having a shaft; -- applied to a spear when the head and the
shaft are of different tinctures.

Shaft"ing, n. (Mach.) Shafts, collectivelly; a system of connected
shafts for communicating motion.

{ Shaft"man (?), Shaft"ment (?), } n. [AS. sceaftmund.] A measure of
about six inches. [Obs.]

<! p. 1322 !>

Shag (?), n. [AS. sceacga a bush of hair; akin to Icel. skegg the
beard, Sw. skägg, Dan. skj&?;g. Cf. Schock of hair.] 1. Coarse hair or
nap; rough, woolly hair.

    True Witney broadcloth, with its shag unshorn.


Gay.

2. A kind of cloth having a long, coarse nap.

3. (Com.) A kind of prepared tobacco cut fine.

4. (Zoöl.) Any species of cormorant.

Shag, a. Hairy; shaggy. Shak.

Shag, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shagged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shagging.] To
make hairy or shaggy; hence, to make rough.

    Shag the green zone that bounds the boreal skies.


J. Barlow.

Shag"bark` (?), n. (Bot.) A rough-barked species of hickory (Carya
alba), its nut. Called also shellbark. See Hickory. (b) The West Indian
Pithecolobium micradenium, a legiminous tree with a red coiled-up pod.

Shage"bush` (?), n. A sackbut. [Obs.]

Shag"ged (?), a. Shaggy; rough. Milton. -- Shag"ged*ness, n. Dr. H.
More.

Shag"gi*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being shaggy; roughness;
shaggedness.

Shag"gy (?), a. [Compar. Shaggier (?); superl. Shaggiest.] [From Shag,
n.] Rough with long hair or wool.

    About his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin.


Dryden.

2. Rough; rugged; jaggy. Milton.

    [A rill] that winds unseen beneath the shaggy fell.


Keble.

Shag"-haired` (?), a. Having shaggy hair. Shak.

Shag"-rag` (?), n. The unkempt and ragged part of the community.
[Colloq. or Slang.] R. Browning.

Sha*green" (?), v. t. To chagrin. [Obs.]

Sha*green", n. [F. chagrin, It. zigrino, fr. Turk. saghri the back of a
horse or other beast of burden, shagreen. Cf. Chagrin.] 1. A kind of
untanned leather prepared in Russia and the East, from the skins of
horses, asses, and camels, and grained so as to be covered with small
round granulations. This characteristic surface is produced by pressing
small seeds into the grain or hair side when moist, and afterward, when
dry, scraping off the roughness left between them, and then, by
soaking, causing the portions of the skin which had been compressed or
indented by the seeds to swell up into relief. It is used for covering
small cases and boxes.

2. The skin of various small sharks and other fishes when having small,
rough, bony scales. The dogfishes of the genus Scyllium furnish a large
part of that used in the arts.

{ Sha*green" (?), Sha*greened" (?) } a. 1. Made or covered with the
leather called shagreen. "A shagreen case of lancets." T. Hook.

2. (Zoöl.) Covered with rough scales or points like those on shagreen.

Shah (shä), n. [Per. shh a king, sovereign, prince. Cf. Checkmate,
Chess, Pasha.] The title of the supreme ruler in certain Eastern
countries, especially Persia. [Written also schah.]

Shah Nameh. [Per., Book of Kings.] A celebrated historical poem written
by Firdousi, being the most ancient in the modern Persian language.
Brande & C.

||Sha*hin" (?), n. [Ar. shhn.] (Zoöl.) A large and swift Asiatic falcon
||(Falco pregrinator) highly valued in falconry.

Shaik (?), n. See Sheik.

Shail (?), v. i. [Cf. AS. sceolh squinting, Icel. skjgr wry, oblique,
Dan. skele to squint.] To walk sidewise. [Obs.] L'Estrange.

Shake (?), obs. p. p. of Shake. Chaucer.

Shake, v. t. [imp. Shook (?); p. p. Shaken (?), (Shook, obs.); p. pr. &
vb. n. Shaking.] [OE. shaken, schaken, AS. scacan, sceacan; akin to
Icel. & Sw. skaka, OS. skakan, to depart, to flee. &radic;161. Cf.
Shock, v.] 1. To cause to move with quick or violent vibrations; to
move rapidly one way and the other; to make to tremble or shiver; to
agitate.

    As a fig tree casteth her untimely figs, when she is shaken of a
    mighty wind.


Rev. vi. 13.

    Ascend my chariot; guide the rapid wheels That shake heaven's
    basis.


Milton.

2. Fig.: To move from firmness; to weaken the stability of; to cause to
waver; to impair the resolution of.

    When his doctrines grew too strong to be shook by his enemies, they
    persecuted his reputation.


Atterbury.

    Thy equal fear that my firm faith and love Can by his fraud be
    shaken or seduced.


Milton.

3. (Mus.) To give a tremulous tone to; to trill; as, to shake a note in
music.

4. To move or remove by agitating; to throw off by a jolting or
vibrating motion; to rid one's self of; -- generally with an adverb, as
off, out, etc.; as, to shake fruit down from a tree.

    Shake off the golden slumber of repose.


Shak.

    'Tis our fast intent To shake all cares and business from our age.


Shak.

    I could scarcely shake him out of my company.


Bunyan.

To shake a cask (Naut.), to knock a cask to pieces and pack the staves.
-- To shake hands, to perform the customary act of civility by clasping
and moving hands, as an expression of greeting, farewell, good will,
agreement, etc. -- To shake out a reef (Naut.), to untile the reef
points and spread more canvas. -- To shake the bells. See under Bell.
-- To shake the sails (Naut.), to luff up in the wind, causing the
sails to shiver. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

Shake, v. i. To be agitated with a waving or vibratory motion; to
tremble; to shiver; to quake; to totter.

    Under his burning wheels The steadfast empyrean shook throughout,
    All but the throne itself of God.


Milton.

    What danger? Who 's that that shakes behind there?


Beau. & Fl.

Shaking piece, a name given by butchers to the piece of beef cut from
the under side of the neck. See Illust. of Beef.

Shake (?), n. 1. The act or result of shaking; a vacillating or
wavering motion; a rapid motion one way and other; a trembling,
quaking, or shivering; agitation.

    The great soldier's honor was composed Of thicker stuff, which
    could endure a shake.


Herbert.

    Our salutations were very hearty on both sides, consisting of many
    kind shakes of the hand.


Addison.

2. A fissure or crack in timber, caused by its being dried too
suddenly. Gwilt.

3. A fissure in rock or earth.

4. (Mus.) A rapid alternation of a principal tone with another
represented on the next degree of the staff above or below it; a trill.

5. (Naut.) One of the staves of a hogshead or barrel taken apart.
Totten.

6. A shook of staves and headings. Knight.

7. (Zoöl.) The redshank; -- so called from the nodding of its head
while on the ground. [Prov. Eng.]

No great shakes, of no great importance. [Slang] Byron. -- The shakes,
the fever and ague. [Colloq. U.S.]

Shake"down` (?), n. A temporary substitute for a bed, as one made on
the floor or on chairs; -- perhaps originally from the shaking down of
straw for this purpose. Sir W. Scott.

Shake"fork` (?), n. A fork for shaking hay; a pitchfork. [Obs.]

Shak"en (?), a. 1. Caused to shake; agitated; as, a shaken bough.

2. Cracked or checked; split. See Shake, n., 2.

    Nor is the wood shaken or twisted.


Barroe.

3. Impaired, as by a shock.

Shak"er (?), n. 1. A person or thing that shakes, or by means of which
something is shaken.

2. One of a religious sect who do not marry, popularly so called from
the movements of the members in dancing, which forms a part of their
worship.

The sect originated in England in 1747, and came to the United States
in 1774, under the leadership of Mother Ann Lee. The Shakers are
sometimes nicknamed Shaking Quakers, but they differ from the Quakers
in doctrine and practice. They style themselves the "United Society of
Believers in Christ's Second Appearing." The sect is now confined in
the United States.

3. (Zoöl.) A variety of pigeon. P. J. Selby.

Shak"er*ess, n. A female Shaker.

Shak"er*ism (?), n. Doctrines of the Shakers.

Shake*spear"e*an (?), a. Of, pertaining to, or in the style of,
Shakespeare or his works. [Written also Shakespearian, Shakspearean,
Shakspearian, Shaksperean, Shaksperian.etc.]

Shak"i*ness (?), n. Quality of being shaky.

Shak"ings (?), n. pl. (Naut.) Deck sweepings, refuse of cordage,
canvas, etc. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

Shak"o (?), n. [Hung. csákó: cf. F. shako, schako.] A kind of military
cap or headdress.

Shak"y (?), a. [Compar. Shakier (?); superl. Shakiest.] 1. Shaking or
trembling; as, a shaky spot in a marsh; a shaky hand. Thackeray.

2. Full of shakes or cracks; cracked; as, shaky timber. Gwilt.

3. Easily shaken; tottering; unsound; as, a shaky constitution; shaky
business credit. [Colloq.]

Shale (?), n. [AS. scealy, scalu. See Scalme, and cf. Shell.] 1. A
shell or husk; a cod or pod. "The green shales of a bean." Chapman.

2. [G. shale.] (Geol.) A fine- grained sedimentary rock of a thin,
laminated, and often friable, structure.

Bituminous shale. See under Bituminous.

Shale, v. t. To take off the shell or coat of; to shell.

    Life, in its upper grades, was bursting its shell, or was shaling
    off its husk.


I. Taylor.

Shall (?), v. i. & auxiliary. [imp. Should (?).] [OE. shal, schal, imp.
sholde, scholde, AS. scal, sceal, I am obliged, imp. scolde, sceolde,
inf. sculan; akin to OS. skulan, pres. skal, imp. skolda, D. zullen,
pres. zal, imp. zoude, zou, OHG. solan, scolan, pres. scal, sol. imp.
scolta, solta, G. sollen, pres. soll, imp. sollte, Icel. skulu, pres.
skal, imp. skyldi, SW. skola, pres. skall, imp. skulle, Dan. skulle,
pres. skal, imp. skulde, Goth. skulan, pres. skal, imp. skulda, and to
AS. scyld guilt, G. schuld guilt, fault, debt, and perhaps to L. scelus
crime.] [Shall is defective, having no infinitive, imperative, or
participle.] 1. To owe; to be under obligation for. [Obs.] "By the
faith I shall to God" Court of Love.

2. To be obliged; must. [Obs.] "Me athinketh [I am sorry] that I shall
rehearse it her." Chaucer.

3. As an auxiliary, shall indicates a duty or necessity whose
obligation is derived from the person speaking; as, you shall go; he
shall go; that is, I order or promise your going. It thus ordinarily
expresses, in the second and third persons, a command, a threat, or a
promise. If the auxillary be emphasized, the command is made more
imperative, the promise or that more positive and sure. It is also
employed in the language of prophecy; as, "the day shall come when . .
. , " since a promise or threat and an authoritative prophecy nearly
coincide in significance. In shall with the first person, the necessity
of the action is sometimes implied as residing elsewhere than in the
speaker; as, I shall suffer; we shall see; and there is always a less
distinct and positive assertion of his volition than is indicated by
will. "I shall go" implies nearly a simple futurity; more exactly, a
foretelling or an expectation of my going, in which, naturally enough,
a certain degree of plan or intention may be included; emphasize the
shall, and the event is described as certain to occur, and the
expression approximates in meaning to our emphatic "I will go." In a
question, the relation of speaker and source of obligation is of course
transferred to the person addressed; as, "Shall you go?" (answer, "I
shall go"); "Shall he go?" i. e., "Do you require or promise his
going?" (answer, "He shall go".) The same relation is transferred to
either second or third person in such phrases as "You say, or think,
you shall go;" "He says, or thinks, he shall go." After a conditional
conjunction (as if, whether) shall is used in all persons to express
futurity simply; as, if I, you, or he shall say they are right. Should
is everywhere used in the same connection and the same senses as shall,
as its imperfect. It also expresses duty or moral obligation; as, he
should do it whether he will or not. In the early English, and hence in
our English Bible, shall is the auxiliary mainly used, in all the
persons, to express simple futurity. (Cf. Will, v. t.) Shall may be
used elliptically; thus, with an adverb or other word expressive of
motion go may be omitted. "He to England shall along with you." Shak.

Shall and will are often confounded by inaccurate speakers and writers.
Say: I shall be glad to see you. Shall I do this? Shall I help you?
(not Will I do this?) See Will.

Shal"li (?), n. See Challis.

Shal"lon (?), n. (Bot.) An evergreen shrub (Gaultheria Shallon) of
Northwest America; also, its fruit. See Salal-berry.

Shal*loon" (?), n. [F. chalon, from Châlons, in France, where it was
first made.] A thin, loosely woven, twilled worsted stuff.

    In blue shalloon shall Hannibal be clad.


Swift.

Shal"lop (?), n. [F. chaloupe, probably from D. sloep. Cf. Sloop.]
(Naut.) A boat.

    [She] thrust the shallop from the floating strand.


Spenser.

The term shallop is applied to boats of all sizes, from a light canoe
up to a large boat with masts and sails.

Shal*lot" (?), n. [OF. eschalote (for escalone), F. échalote. See
Scallion, and cf. Eschalot.] (Bot.) A small kind of onion (Allium
Ascalonicum) growing in clusters, and ready for gathering in spring; a
scallion, or eschalot.

Shal"low (?), a. [Compar. Shallower (?); superl. Shallowest.] [OE.
schalowe, probably originally, sloping or shelving; cf. Icel. skjlgr
wry, squinting, AS. sceolh, D. & G. scheel, OHG. schelah. Cf. Shelve to
slope, Shoal shallow.] 1. Not deep; having little depth; shoal.
"Shallow brooks, and rivers wide." Milton.

2. Not deep in tone. [R.]

    The sound perfecter and not so shallow and jarring.


Bacon.

3. Not intellectually deep; not profound; not penetrating deeply;
simple; not wise or knowing; ignorant; superficial; as, a shallow mind;
shallow learning.

    The king was neither so shallow, nor so ill advertised, as not to
    perceive the intention of the French king.


Bacon.

    Deep versed in books, and shallow in himself.


Milton.

Shal"low, n. 1. A place in a body of water where the water is not deep;
a shoal; a flat; a shelf.

    A swift stream is not heard in the channel, but upon shallows of
    gravel.


Bacon.

    Dashed on the shallows of the moving sand.


Dryden.

2. (Zoöl.) The rudd. [Prov. Eng.]

Shal"low, v. t. To make shallow. Sir T. Browne.

Shal"low, v. i. To become shallow, as water.

Shal"low-bod`ied (?), a. (Naut.) Having a moderate depth of hold; --
said of a vessel.

Shal"low-brained` (?), a. Weak in intellect; foolish; empty-headed.
South.

Shal"low-heart`ed (?), a. Incapable of deep feeling. Tennyson.

Shal"low*ly, adv. In a shallow manner.

Shal"low*ness, n. Quality or state of being shallow.

Shal"low-pat`ed (?), a. Shallow- brained.

Shal"low-waist`ed (?), a. (Naut.) Having a flush deck, or with only a
moderate depression amidships; -- said of a vessel.

Shalm (?), n. See Shawm. [Obs.] Knolles.

Shalt (?), 2d per. sing. of Shall.

Shal"y (?), a. Resembling shale in structure.

Sham (?), n. [Originally the same word as shame, hence, a disgrace, a
trick. See Shame, n.] 1. That which deceives expectation; any trick,
fraud, or device that deludes and disappoint; a make-believe; delusion;
imposture, humbug. "A mere sham." Bp. Stillingfleet.

    Believe who will the solemn sham, not I.


Addison.

2. A false front, or removable ornamental covering.

Pillow sham, a covering to be laid on a pillow.

Sham, a. False; counterfeit; pretended; feigned; unreal; as, a sham
fight.

    They scorned the sham independence proffered to them by the
    Athenians.


Jowett (Thucyd)

Sham, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shammed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shamming.] 1. To
trick; to cheat; to deceive or delude with false pretenses.

    Fooled and shammed into a conviction.


L'Estrange.

2. To obtrude by fraud or imposition. [R.]

    We must have a care that we do not . . . sham fallacies upon the
    world for current reason.


L'Estrange.

3. To assume the manner and character of; to imitate; to ape; to feign.

To sham Abram or Abraham, to feign sickness; to malinger. Hence a
malingerer is called, in sailors' cant, Sham Abram, or Sham Abraham.

Sham, v. i. To make false pretenses; to deceive; to feign; to impose.

    Wondering . . . whether those who lectured him were such fools as
    they professed to be, or were only shamming.


Macaulay.

||Sha"ma (?), n. [Hind. shm.] (Zoöl.) A saxicoline singing bird
||(Kittacincla macroura) of India, noted for the sweetness and power of
||its song. In confinement it imitates the notes of other birds and
||various animals with accuracy. Its head, neck, back, breast, and tail
||are glossy black, the rump white, the under parts chestnut.

Sha"man (?), n. [From the native name.] A priest of Shamanism; a wizard
among the Shamanists.

<! p. 1323 !>

Sha*man"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to Shamanism.

Sha"man*ism (?), n. The type of religion which once prevalied among all
the Ural-Altaic peoples (Tungusic, Mongol, and Turkish), and which
still survives in various parts of Northern Asia. The Shaman, or wizard
priest, deals with good as well as with evil spirits, especially the
good spirits of ancestors. Encyc. Brit.

Sha"man*ist, n. An adherent of Shamanism.

Sham"ble (?), n. [OE. schamel a bench, stool, AS. scamel, sceamol, a
bench, form, stool, fr. L. scamellum, dim. of scamnum a bench, stool.]
1. (Mining) One of a succession of niches or platforms, one above
another, to hold ore which is thrown successively from platform to
platform, and thus raised to a higher level.

2. pl. A place where butcher's meat is sold.

    As summer flies are in the shambles.


Shak.

3. pl. A place for slaughtering animals for meat.

    To make a shambles of the parliament house.


Shak.

Sham"ble, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shambled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shambling
(?).] [Cf. OD. schampelen to slip, schampen to slip away, escape. Cf.
Scamble, Scamper.] To walk awkwardly and unsteadily, as if the knees
were weak; to shuffle along.

Sham"bling (?), a. Characterized by an awkward, irregular pace; as, a
shambling trot; shambling legs.

Sham"bling, n. An awkward, irregular gait.

Shame (?), n. [OE. shame, schame, AS. scamu, sceamu; akin to OS. & OHG.
scama, G. scham, Icel. skömm, shkamm, Sw. & Dan. skam, D. & G. schande,
Goth. skanda shame, skaman sik to be ashamed; perhaps from a root skam
meaning to cover, and akin to the root (kam) of G. hemd shirt, E.
chemise. Cf. Sham.] 1. A painful sensation excited by a consciousness
of guilt or impropriety, or of having done something which injures
reputation, or of the exposure of that which nature or modesty prompts
us to conceal.

    HIde, for shame, Romans, your grandsires' images, That blush at
    their degenerate progeny.


Dryden.

    Have you no modesty, no maiden shame?


Shak.

2. Reproach incurred or suffered; dishonor; ignominy; derision;
contempt.

    Ye have borne the shame of the heathen.


Ezek. xxxvi. 6.

    Honor and shame from no condition rise.


Pope.

    And every woe a tear can claim Except an erring sister's shame.


Byron.

3. The cause or reason of shame; that which brings reproach, and
degrades a person in the estimation of others; disgrace.

    O C&?;sar, what a wounding shame is this!


Shak.

    Guides who are the shame of religion.


Shak.

4. The parts which modesty requires to be covered; the private parts.
Isa. xlvii. 3.

For shame! you should be ashamed; shame on you! -- To put to shame, to
cause to feel shame; to humiliate; to disgrace. "Let them be driven
backward and put to shame that wish me evil." Ps. xl. 14.

Shame, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shamed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shaming.] 1. To
make ashamed; to excite in (a person) a comsciousness of guilt or
impropriety, or of conduct derogatory to reputation; to put to shame.

    Were there but one righteous in the world, he would . . . shame the
    world, and not the world him.


South.

2. To cover with reproach or ignominy; to dishonor; to disgrace.

    And with foul cowardice his carcass shame.


Spenser.

3. To mock at; to deride. [Obs. or R.]

    Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor.


Ps. xiv. 6.

Shame, v. i. [AS. scamian, sceamian. See Shame, n.] To be ashamed; to
feel shame. [R.]

    I do shame To think of what a noble strain you are.


Shak.

Shame"faced` (?), a. [For shamefast; AS. scamfæst. See Shame, n., and
Fast firm.] Easily confused or put out of countenance; diffident;
bashful; modest.

    Your shamefaced virtue shunned the people's prise.


Dryden.

Shamefaced was once shamefast, shamefacedness was shamefastness, like
steadfast and steadfastness; but the ordinary manifestations of shame
being by the face, have brought it to its present orthography. Trench.

-- Shame"faced, adv. -- Shame"faced`ness, n.

Shame"fast (?), a. [AS. scamfæst.] Modest; shamefaced. --
Shame"fast*ly, adv. -- Shame"fast*ness, n. [Archaic] See Shamefaced.

    Shamefast she was in maiden shamefastness.


Chaucer.

    [Conscience] is a blushing shamefast spirit.


Shak.

    Modest apparel with shamefastness.


1 Tim. ii. 9 (Rev. Ver.).

Shame"ful (?), a. 1. Bringing shame or disgrace; injurious to
reputation; disgraceful.

    His naval preparations were not more surprising than his quick and
    shameful retreat.


Arbuthnot.

2. Exciting the feeling of shame in others; indecent; as, a shameful
picture; a shameful sight. Spenser.

Syn. -- Disgraceful; reproachful; indecent; unbecoming; degrading;
scandalous; ignominious; infamous.

-- Shame"ful*ly, adv. -- Shame"ful*ness, n.

Shame"less, a. [AS. scamleás.] 1. Destitute of shame; wanting modesty;
brazen-faced; insensible to disgrace. "Such shameless bards we have."
Pope.

    Shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.


Shak.

2. Indicating want of modesty, or sensibility to disgrace; indecent;
as, a shameless picture or poem.

Syn. -- Impudent; unblushing; audacious; immodest; indecent;
indelicate.

-- Shame"less*ly, adv. -- Shame"less*ness, n.

Shame"-proof` (?), n. Shameless. Shak.

Sham"er (?), n. One who, or that which, disgraces, or makes ashamed.
Beau. & Fl.

Sham"mer (?), n. One who shams; an impostor. Johnson.

Sham"my (?), n. [F. chamious a chamois, shammy leather. See Chamois.]
1. (Zoöl.) The chamois.

2. A soft, pliant leather, prepared originally from the skin of the
chamois, but now made also from the skin of the sheep, goat, kid, deer,
and calf. See Shamoying. [Written also chamois, shamoy, and shamois.]

{ Sham"ois, Sham"oy } (?), n. See Shammy.

Sha*moy"ing (?), n. [See Shammy.] A process used in preparing certain
kinds of leather, which consists in frizzing the skin, and working oil
into it to supply the place of the astringent (tannin, alum, or the
like) ordinarily used in tanning.

Sham*poo" (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shampooed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shampooing.] [Hind. chmpn to press, to squeeze.] [Writing also
champoo.] 1. To press or knead the whole surface of the body of (a
person), and at the same time to stretch the limbs and joints, in
connection with the hot bath.

2. To wash throughly and rub the head of (a person), with the fingers,
using either soap, or a soapy preparation, for the more thorough
cleansing.

Sham*poo", n. The act of shampooing.

Sham*poo"er (?), n. One who shampoos.

Sham"rock (?), n. [L. seamrog, seamar, trefoil, white clover, white
honeysuckle; akin to Gael. seamrag.] (Bot.) A trifoliate plant used as
a national emblem by the Irish. The legend is that St. Patrick once
plucked a leaf of it for use in illustrating the doctrine of the
trinity.

The original plant was probably a kind of wood sorrel (Oxalis
Acetocella); but now the name is given to the white clover (Trifolium
repens), and the black medic (Medicago lupulina).

Shan"dry*dan (?), n. A jocosely depreciative name for a vehicle.
[Ireland]

Shan"dy*gaff (&?;), n. A mixture of strong beer and ginger beer. [Eng.]

Shang`hai" (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shanghaied (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shanghaiing.] To intoxicate and ship (a person) as a sailor while in
this condition. [Written also shanghae.] [Slang, U.S.]

Shang`hai" (?), n. (Zoöl.) A large and tall breed of domestic fowl.

Shank (?), n. (Zoöl.) See Chank.

Shank, n. [OE. shanke, schanke, schonke, AS. scanca, sceanca, sconca,
sceonca; akin to D. schonk a bone, G. schenkel thigh, shank, schinken
ham, OHG. scincha shank, Dan. & Sw. skank. &radic;161. Cf. Skink, v.]
1. The part of the leg from the knee to the foot; the shin; the shin
bone; also, the whole leg.

    His youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide For his shrunk
    shank.


Shak.

2. Hence, that part of an instrument, tool, or other thing, which
connects the acting part with a handle or other part, by which it is
held or moved. Specifically: (a) That part of a key which is between
the bow and the part which enters the wards of the lock. (b) The middle
part of an anchor, or that part which is between the ring and the arms.
See Illustr. of Anchor. (c) That part of a hoe, rake, knife, or the
like, by which it is secured to a handle. (d) A loop forming an eye to
a button.

3. (Arch.) The space between two channels of the Doric triglyph. Gwilt.

4. (Founding) A large ladle for molten metal, fitted with long bars for
handling it.

5. (Print.) The body of a type.

6. (Shoemaking) The part of the sole beneath the instep connecting the
broader front part with the heel.

7. (Zoöl.) A wading bird with long legs; as, the green-legged shank, or
knot; the yellow shank, or tattler; -- called also shanks.

8. pl. Flat-nosed pliers, used by opticians for nipping off the edges
of pieces of glass to make them round.

Shank painter (Naut.), a short rope or chain which holds the shank of
an anchor against the side of a vessel when it is secured for a voyage.
-- To ride shank's mare, to go on foot; to walk.

Shank, v. i. To fall off, as a leaf, flower, or capsule, on account of
disease affecting the supporting footstalk; -- usually followed by off.
Darwin.

Shank"beer` (?), n. See Schenkbeer.

Shanked (?), a. Having a shank.

Shank"er (?), n. (Med.) See Chancre.

Shan"ny (?), n.; pl. Shannies (#). [Etymol. uncertain.] (Zoöl.) The
European smooth blenny (Blennius pholis). It is olive-green with
irregular black spots, and without appendages on the head.

Shan't (?). A contraction of shall not. [Colloq.]

Shan"ty (?), a. Jaunty; showy. [Prov. Eng.]

Shan"ty, n.;pl. Shanties (#). [Said to be fr. Ir. sean old + tig. a
house.] A small, mean dwelling; a rough, slight building for temporary
use; a hut.

Shan"ty, v. i. To inhabit a shanty. S. H. Hammond.

Shap"a*ble (?), a. 1. That may be shaped.

2. Shapely. [R.] "Round and shapable." De Foe.

Shape (shp), v. t. [imp. Shaped (shpt); p. p. Shaped or Shapen
(shp"'n); p. pr. & vb. n. Shaping.] [OE. shapen, schapen, AS. sceapian.
The p. p. shapen is from the strong verb, AS. scieppan, scyppan,
sceppan, p. p. sceapen. See Shape, n.] 1. To form or create;
especially, to mold or make into a particular form; to give proper form
or figure to.

    I was shapen in iniquity.


Ps. li. 5.

    Grace shaped her limbs, and beauty decked her face.


Prior.

2. To adapt to a purpose; to regulate; to adjust; to direct; as, to
shape the course of a vessel.

    To the stream, when neither friends, nor force, Nor speed nor art
    avail, he shapes his course.


Denham.

    Charmed by their eyes, their manners I acquire, And shape my
    foolishness to their desire.


Prior.

3. To image; to conceive; to body forth.

    Oft my jealousy Shapes faults that are not.


Shak.

4. To design; to prepare; to plan; to arrange.

    When shapen was all this conspiracy, From point to point.


Chaucer.

Shaping machine. (Mach.) Same as Shaper. -- To shape one's self, to
prepare; to make ready. [Obs.]

    I will early shape me therefor.


Chaucer.

Shape (shp), v. i. To suit; to be adjusted or conformable. [R.] Shak.

Shape, n. [OE. shap, schap, AS. sceap in gesceap creation, creature,
fr. the root of scieppan, scyppan, sceppan, to shape, to do, to effect;
akin to OS. giskeppian, OFries. skeppa, D. scheppen, G. schaffen, OHG.
scaffan, scepfen, skeffen, Icer. skapa, skepja, Dan. skabe, skaffe, Sw.
skapa, skaffa, Goth. gaskapjan, and perhaps to E. shave, v. Cf. -ship.]
1. Character or construction of a thing as determining its external
appearance; outward aspect; make; figure; form; guise; as, the shape of
a tree; the shape of the head; an elegant shape.

    He beat me grievously, in the shape of a woman.


Shak.

2. That which has form or figure; a figure; an appearance; a being.

    Before the gates three sat, On either side, a formidable shape.


Milton.

3. A model; a pattern; a mold.

4. Form of embodiment, as in words; form, as of thought or conception;
concrete embodiment or example, as of some quality. Milton.

5. Dress for disguise; guise. [Obs.]

    Look better on this virgin, and consider This Persian shape laid
    by, and she appearing In a Greekish dress.


Messinger.

6. (Iron Manuf.) (a) A rolled or hammered piece, as a bar, beam, angle
iron, etc., having a cross section different from merchant bar. (b) A
piece which has been roughly forged nearly to the form it will receive
when completely forged or fitted.

To take shape, to assume a definite form.

Shape"less, a. Destitute of shape or regular form; wanting symmetry of
dimensions; misshapen; -- opposed to shapely. -- Shape"less*ness, n.

    The shapeless rock, or hanging precipice.


Pope.

Shape"li*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being shapely.

Shape"ly, a. [Compar. Shapelier (?); superl. Shapeliest.] 1.
Well-formed; having a regular shape; comely; symmetrical. T. Warton.

    Waste sandy valleys, once perplexed with thorn, The spiry fir and
    shapely box adorn.


Pope.

    Where the shapely column stood.


Couper.

2. Fit; suitable. [Obs.]

    Shaply for to be an alderman.


Chaucer.

Shap"er (?), n. 1. One who shapes; as, the shaper of one's fortunes.

    The secret of those old shapers died with them.


Lowell.

2. That which shapes; a machine for giving a particular form or outline
to an object. Specifically; (a) (Metal Working) A kind of planer in
which the tool, instead of the work, receives a reciprocating motion,
usually from a crank. (b) (Wood Working) A machine with a vertically
revolving cutter projecting above a flat table top, for cutting
irregular outlines, moldings, etc.

Sha"poo (?), n. (Zoöl.) The oörial.

Shard (shärd), n. A plant; chard. [Obs.] Dryden.

Shard, n. [AS. sceard, properly a p. p. from the root of scearn to
shear, to cut; akin to D. schaard a fragment, G. scharte a notch, Icel.
skarð. See Shear, and cf. Sherd.] [Written also sheard, and sherd.] 1.
A piece or fragment of an earthen vessel, or a like brittle substance,
as the shell of an egg or snail. Shak.

    The precious dish Broke into shards of beauty on the board.


E. Arnold.

2. (Zoöl.) The hard wing case of a beetle.

    They are his shards, and he their beetle.


Shak.

3. A gap in a fence. [Obs.] Stanyhurst.

4. A boundary; a division. [Obs. & R.] Spenser.

Shard"-borne` (?), a. Borne on shards or scaly wing cases. "The
shard-borne beetle." Shak.

Shard"ed, a. (Zoöl.) Having elytra, as a beetle.

Shard"y (?), a. Having, or consisting of, shards.

Share (?), n. [OE. schar, AS. scear; akin to OHG. scaro, G. schar,
pflugshar, and E. shear, v. See Shear.] 1. The part (usually an iron or
steel plate) of a plow which cuts the ground at the bottom of a furrow;
a plowshare.

2. The part which opens the ground for the reception of the seed, in a
machine for sowing seed. Knight.

Share, n. [OE. share, AS. scearu, scaru, fr. sceran to shear, cut. See
Shear, v.] 1. A certain quantity; a portion; a part; a division; as, a
small share of prudence.

2. Especially, the part allotted or belonging to one, of any property
or interest owned by a number; a portion among others; an apportioned
lot; an allotment; a dividend. "My share of fame." Dryden.

3. Hence, one of a certain number of equal portions into which any
property or invested capital is divided; as, a ship owned in ten
shares.

4. The pubes; the sharebone. [Obs.] Holland.

To go shares, to partake; to be equally concerned. -- Share and share
alike, in equal shares.

Share, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shared (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sharing.] 1. To
part among two or more; to distribute in portions; to divide.

    Suppose I share my fortune equally between my children and a
    stranger.


Swift.

<! p. 1324 !>

2. To partake of, use, or experience, with others; to have a portion
of; to take and possess in common; as, to share a shelter with another.

    While avarice and rapine share the land.


Milton.

3. To cut; to shear; to cleave; to divide. [Obs.]

    The shared visage hangs on equal sides.


Dryden.

Share (?), v. i. To have part; to receive a portion; to partake, enjoy,
or suffer with others.

    A right of inheritance gave every one a title to share in the goods
    of his father.


Locke.

Share"beam` (?), n. The part of the plow to which the share is
attached.

Share"bone` (?), n. (Anat.) The public bone.

Share"bro`ker (?), n. A broker who deals in railway or other shares and
securities.

Share"hold`er (?), n. One who holds or owns a share or shares in a
joint fund or property.

Shar"er (?), n. One who shares; a participator; a partaker; also, a
divider; a distributer.

Share"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) A composite plant (Aster Tripolium) growing
along the seacoast of Europe.

Shark (?), n. [Of uncertain origin; perhaps through OF. fr. carcharus a
kind of dogfish, Gr. karchari`as, so called from its sharp teeth, fr.
ka`rcharos having sharp or jagged teeth; or perhaps named from its
rapacity (cf. Shark, v. t. & i.); cf. Corn. scarceas.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any
one of numerous species of elasmobranch fishes of the order
Plagiostomi, found in all seas.

Some sharks, as the basking shark and the whale shark, grow to an
enormous size, the former becoming forty feet or more, and the latter
sixty feet or more, in length. Most of them are harmless to man, but
some are exceedingly voracious. The man-eating sharks mostly belong to
the genera Carcharhinus, Carcharodon, and related genera. They have
several rows of large sharp teeth with serrated edges, as the great
white shark (Carcharodon carcharias, or Rondeleti) of tropical seas,
and the great blue shark (Carcharhinus glaucus) of all tropical and
temperate seas. The former sometimes becomes thirty-six feet long, and
is the most voracious and dangerous species known. The rare man-eating
shark of the United States coast (Charcarodon Atwoodi) is thought by
some to be a variety, or the young, of C. carcharias. The dusky shark
(Carcharhinus obscurus), and the smaller blue shark (C. caudatus), both
common species on the coast of the United States, are of moderate size
and not dangerous. They feed on shellfish and bottom fishes.

2. A rapacious, artful person; a sharper. [Colloq.]

3. Trickery; fraud; petty rapine; as, to live upon the shark. [Obs.]
South.

Baskin shark, Liver shark, Nurse shark, Oil shark, Sand shark, Tiger
shark, etc. See under Basking, Liver, etc. See also Dogfish, Houndfish,
Notidanian, and Tope. -- Gray shark, the sand shark. -- Hammer-headed
shark. See Hammerhead. -- Port Jackson shark. See Cestraciont. -- Shark
barrow, the eggcase of a shark; a sea purse. -- Shark ray. Same as
Angel fish (a), under Angel. -- Thrasher shark, or Thresher shark, a
large, voracious shark. See Thrasher. -- Whale shark, a huge harmless
shark (Rhinodon typicus) of the Indian Ocean. It becomes sixty feet or
more in length, but has very small teeth.

Shark, v. t. [Of uncertain origin; perhaps fr. shark, n., or perhaps
related to E. shear (as hearken to hear), and originally meaning, to
clip off. Cf. Shirk.] To pick or gather indiscriminately or covertly.
[Obs.] Shak.

Shark, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sharked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sharking.] 1.
To play the petty thief; to practice fraud or trickery; to swindle.

    Neither sharks for a cup or a reckoning.


Bp. Earle.

2. To live by shifts and stratagems. Beau. & Fl.

Shark"er (?), n. One who lives by sharking.

Shark"ing, n. Petty rapine; trick; also, seeking a livelihood by shifts
and dishonest devices.

Shar"ock (?), n. An East Indian coin of the value of 12½ pence
sterling, or about 25 cents.

Sharp (?), a. [Compar. Sharper (?); superl. Sharpest.] [OE. sharp,
scharp, scarp, AS. scearp; akin to OS. skarp, LG. scharp, D. scherp, G.
scharf, Dan. & Sw. skarp, Icel. skarpr. Cf. Escarp, Scrape, Scorpion.]
1. Having a very thin edge or fine point; of a nature to cut or pierce
easily; not blunt or dull; keen.

    He dies upon my scimeter's sharp point.


Shak.

2. Terminating in a point or edge; not obtuse or rounded; somewhat
pointed or edged; peaked or ridged; as, a sharp hill; sharp features.

3. Affecting the sense as if pointed or cutting, keen, penetrating,
acute: to the taste or smell, pungent, acid, sour, as ammonia has a
sharp taste and odor; to the hearing, piercing, shrill, as a sharp
sound or voice; to the eye, instantaneously brilliant, dazzling, as a
sharp flash.

4. (Mus.) (a) High in pitch; acute; as, a sharp note or tone. (b)
Raised a semitone in pitch; as, C sharp (C), which is a half step, or
semitone, higher than C. (c) So high as to be out of tune, or above
true pitch; as, the tone is sharp; that instrument is sharp. Opposed in
all these senses to flat.

5. Very trying to the feelings; piercing; keen; severe; painful;
distressing; as, sharp pain, weather; a sharp and frosty air.

    Sharp misery had worn him to the bones.


Shak.

    The morning sharp and clear.


Cowper.

    In sharpest perils faithful proved.


Keble.

6. Cutting in language or import; biting; sarcastic; cruel; harsh;
rigorous; severe; as, a sharp rebuke. "That sharp look." Tennyson.

    To that place the sharp Athenian law Can not pursue us.


Shak.

    Be thy words severe, Sharp as merits but the sword forbear.


Dryden.

7. Of keen perception; quick to discern or distinguish; having nice
discrimination; acute; penetrating; sagacious; clever; as, a sharp eye;
sharp sight, hearing, or judgment.

    Nothing makes men sharper . . . than want.


Addison.

    Many other things belong to the material world, wherein the
    sharpest philosophers have never ye&?; arrived at clear and
    distinct ideas.


L. Watts.

8. Eager in pursuit; keen in quest; impatient for gratification; keen;
as, a sharp appetite.

9. Fierce; ardent; fiery; violent; impetuous. "In sharp contest of
battle." Milton.

    A sharp assault already is begun.


Dryden.

10. Keenly or unduly attentive to one's own interest; close and exact
in dealing; shrewd; as, a sharp dealer; a sharp customer.

    The necessity of being so sharp and exacting.


Swift.

11. Composed of hard, angular grains; gritty; as, sharp sand. Moxon.

12. Steep; precipitous; abrupt; as, a sharp ascent or descent; a sharp
turn or curve.

13. (Phonetics) Uttered in a whisper, or with the breath alone, without
voice, as certain consonants, such as p, k, t, f; surd; nonvocal;
aspirated.

Sharp is often used in the formation of self- explaining compounds; as,
sharp-cornered, sharp-edged, sharp-pointed, sharp-tasted,
sharp-visaged, etc.

Sharp practice, the getting of an advantage, or the attempt to do so,
by a tricky expedient. -- To brace sharp, or To sharp up (Naut.), to
turn the yards to the most oblique position possible, that the ship may
lie well up to the wind.

Syn. -- Keen; acute; piercing; penetrating; quick; sagacious;
discerning; shrewd; witty; ingenious; sour; acid; tart; pungent; acrid;
severe; poignant; biting; acrimonious; sarcastic; cutting; bitter;
painful; afflictive; violent; harsh; fierce; ardent; fiery.

Sharp (?), adv. 1. To a point or edge; piercingly; eagerly; sharply. M.
Arnold.

    The head [of a spear] full sharp yground.


Chaucer.

    You bite so sharp at reasons.


Shak.

2. Precisely; exactly; as, we shall start at ten o'clock sharp.
[Colloq.]

Look sharp, attend; be alert. [Colloq.]

Sharp, n. 1. A sharp tool or weapon. [Obs.]

    If butchers had but the manners to go to sharps, gentlemen would be
    contented with a rubber at cuffs.


Collier.

2. (Mus.) (a) The character [] used to indicate that the note before
which it is placed is to be raised a half step, or semitone, in pitch.
(b) A sharp tone or note. Shak.

3. A portion of a stream where the water runs very rapidly. [Prov.
Eng.] C. Kingsley.

4. A sewing needle having a very slender point; a needle of the most
pointed of the three grades, blunts, betweens, and sharps.

5. pl. Same as Middlings, 1.

6. An expert. [Slang]

Sharp, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sharped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sharping.] 1.
To sharpen. [Obs.] Spenser.

2. (Mus.) To raise above the proper pitch; to elevate the tone of;
especially, to raise a half step, or semitone, above the natural tone.

Sharp, v. i. 1. To play tricks in bargaining; to act the sharper.
L'Estrange.

2. (Mus.) To sing above the proper pitch.

Sharp-cut` (?), a. Cut sharply or definitely, or so as to make a clear,
well-defined impression, as the lines of an engraved plate, and the
like; clear-cut; hence, having great distinctness; well-defined; clear.

Sharp"en (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sarpened (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sharpening.] [See Sharp, a.] To make sharp. Specifically: (a) To give a
keen edge or fine point to; to make sharper; as, to sharpen an ax, or
the teeth of a saw. (b) To render more quick or acute in perception; to
make more ready or ingenious.

    The air . . . sharpened his visual ray To objects distant far.


Milton.

    He that wrestles with us strengthens our nerves and sharpens our
    skill.


Burke.

(c) To make more eager; as, to sharpen men's desires.

    Epicurean cooks Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite.


Shak.

(d) To make more pungent and intense; as, to sharpen a pain or disease.
(e) To make biting, sarcastic, or severe. "Sharpen each word." E.
Smith. (f) To render more shrill or piercing.

    Inclosures not only preserve sound, but increase and sharpen it.


Bacon.

(g) To make more tart or acid; to make sour; as, the rays of the sun
sharpen vinegar. (h) (Mus.) To raise, as a sound, by means of a sharp;
to apply a sharp to.

Sharp"en, v. i. To grow or become sharp.

Sharp"er (?), n. A person who bargains closely, especially, one who
cheats in bargains; a swinder; also, a cheating gamester.

    Sharpers, as pikes, prey upon their own kind.


L'Estrange.

Syn. -- Swindler; cheat; deceiver; trickster; rogue. See Swindler.

Sharp"ie (?), n. (Naut.) A long, sharp, flat-bottomed boat, with one or
two masts carrying a triangular sail. They are often called Fair Haven
sharpies, after the place on the coast of Connecticut where they
originated. [Local, U.S.]

Sharp"ling (?), n. (Zoöl.) A stickleback. [Prov. Eng.]

Sharp"ly, adv. In a sharp manner,; keenly; acutely.

    They are more sharply to be chastised and reformed than the rude
    Irish.


Spenser.

    The soldiers were sharply assailed with wants.


Hayward.

    You contract your eye when you would see sharply.


Bacon.

Sharp"ness, n. [AS. scearpness.] The quality or condition of being
sharp; keenness; acuteness.

Sharp"saw` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The great titmouse; -- so called from its
harsh call notes. [Prov. Eng.]

Sharp"-set` (?), a. Eager in appetite or desire of gratification;
affected by keen hunger; ravenous; as, an eagle or a lion sharp-set.

    The town is sharp-set on new plays.


Pope.

Sharp"shoot`er (?), n. One skilled in shooting at an object with
exactness; a good marksman.

Sharp"shoot`ing, n. A shooting with great precision and effect; hence,
a keen contest of wit or argument.

Sharp"-sight`ed (?), a. Having quick or acute sight; -- used literally
and figuratively. -- Sharp`-sight`ed*ness, n.

Sharp"tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The pintail duck. (b) The pintail
grouse, or prairie chicken.

Sharp"-wit`ted (?), a. Having an acute or nicely discerning mind.

Shash (?), n. [See Sash.] 1. The scarf of a turban. [Obs.] Fuller.

2. A sash. [Obs.]

{ ||Shas"ter (?), ||Shas"tra (?), } n. [Skr. cstra an order or command,
a sacred book, fr. cs to order, instruct, govern. Cf. Sastra.] A
treatise for authoritative instruction among the Hindoos; a book of
institutes; especially, a treatise explaining the Vedas. [Written also
sastra.]

Shath"mont (&?;), n. A shaftment. [Scot.]

Shat"ter (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shattered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shattering.] [OE. schateren, scateren, to scatter, to dash, AS.
scateran; cf. D. schateren to crack, to make a great noise, OD.
schetteren to scatter, to burst, to crack. Cf. Scatter.] 1. To break at
once into many pieces; to dash, burst, or part violently into
fragments; to rend into splinters; as, an explosion shatters a rock or
a bomb; too much steam shatters a boiler; an oak is shattered by
lightning.

    A monarchy was shattered to pieces, and divided amongst revolted
    subjects.


Locke.

2. To disorder; to derange; to render unsound; as, to be shattered in
intellect; his constitution was shattered; his hopes were shattered.

    A man of a loose, volatile, and shattered humor.


Norris.

3. To scatter about. [Obs.]

    Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year.


Milton.

Shat"ter, v. i. To be broken into fragments; to fall or crumble to
pieces by any force applied.

    Some fragile bodies break but where the force is; some shatter and
    fly in many places.


Bacon.

Shat"ter, n. A fragment of anything shattered; -- used chiefly or soley
in the phrase into shatters; as, to break a glass into shatters. Swift.

{ Shat"ter-brained` (?), Shat"ter-pat`ed (?), } a. Disordered or
wandering in intellect; hence, heedless; wild. J. Goodman.

Shat"ter*y (?), a. Easily breaking into pieces; not compact; loose of
texture; brittle; as, shattery spar.

Shave (?), obs. p. p. of Shave. Chaucer.

    His beard was shave as nigh as ever he can.


Chaucer.

Shave, v. t. [imp. Shaved (?);p. p. Shaved or Shaven (&?;); p. pr. &
vb. n. Shaving.] [OE. shaven, schaven, AS. scafan, sceafan; akin to D.
schaven, G. schaben, Icel. skafa, Sw. skafva, Dan. skave, Goth. scaban,
Russ. kopate to dig, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, and probably to L. scabere to
scratch, to scrape. Cf. Scab, Shaft, Shape.] 1. To cut or pare off from
the surface of a body with a razor or other edged instrument; to cut
off closely, as with a razor; as, to shave the beard.

2. To make bare or smooth by cutting off closely the surface, or
surface covering, of; especially, to remove the hair from with a razor
or other sharp instrument; to take off the beard or hair of; as, to
shave the face or the crown of the head; he shaved himself.

    I'll shave your crown for this.


Shak.

    The laborer with the bending scythe is seen Shaving the surface of
    the waving green.


Gay.

3. To cut off thin slices from; to cut in thin slices.

    Plants bruised or shaven in leaf or root.


Bacon.

4. To skim along or near the surface of; to pass close to, or touch
lightly, in passing.

    Now shaves with level wing the deep.


Milton.

5. To strip; to plunder; to fleece. [Colloq.]

To shave a note, to buy it at a discount greater than the legal rate of
interest, or to deduct in discounting it more than the legal rate
allows. [Cant, U.S.]

<! p. 1325 !>

Shave (?), v. i. To use a razor for removing the beard; to cut closely;
hence, to be hard and severe in a bargain; to practice extortion; to
cheat.

Shave (?), n. [AS. scafa, sceafa, a sort of knife. See Shave, v. t.] 1.
A thin slice; a shaving. Wright.

2. A cutting of the beard; the operation of shaving.

3. (a) An exorbitant discount on a note. [Cant, U.S.] (b) A premium
paid for an extension of the time of delivery or payment, or for the
right to vary a stock contract in any particular. [Cant, U.S.] N.
Biddle.

4. A hand tool consisting of a sharp blade with a handle at each end; a
drawing knife; a spokeshave.

5. The act of passing very near to, so as almost to graze; as, the
bullet missed by a close shave. [Colloq.]

Shave grass (Bot.), the scouring rush. See the Note under Equisetum. --
Shave hook, a tool for scraping metals, consisting of a sharp- edged
triangular steel plate attached to a shank and handle.

Shave"ling (?), n. A man shaved; hence, a monk, or other religious; --
used in contempt.

    I am no longer a shaveling than while my frock is on my back.


Sir W. Scott.

Shav"er (?), n. 1. One who shaves; one whose occupation is to shave.

2. One who is close in bargains; a sharper. Swift.

3. One who fleeces; a pillager; a plunderer.

    By these shavers the Turks were stripped.


Knolles.

4. A boy; a lad; a little fellow. [Colloq.] "These unlucky little
shavers." Salmagundi.

    As I have mentioned at the door to this young shaver, I am on a
    chase in the name of the king.


Dickens.

5. (Mech.) A tool or machine for shaving.

A note shaver, a person who buys notes at a discount greater than the
legal rate of interest. [Cant, U.S.]

Shav"ing, n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, shaves;
specifically, the act of cutting off the beard with a razor.

2. That which is shaved off; a thin slice or strip pared off with a
shave, a knife, a plane, or other cutting instrument. "Shaving of
silver." Chaucer.

Shaving brush, a brush used in lathering the face preparatory to
shaving it.

Shaw (sh), n. [OE. schawe, schae, thicket, grove, AS. scaga; akin to
Dan. skov, Sw. skog, Icel. skgr.] 1. A thicket; a small wood or grove.
[Obs. or Prov. Eng. & Scot.] Burns.

    Gaillard he was as goldfinch in the shaw.


Chaucer.

    The green shaws, the merry green woods.


Howitt.

2. pl. The leaves and tops of vegetables, as of potatoes, turnips, etc.
[Scot.] Jamieson.

Shaw"fowl`, n. [Scot. schaw, shaw, show + fowl.] The representation or
image of a fowl made by fowlers to shoot at. Johnson.

Shawl (?), n. [Per. & Hind. shl: cf. F. châle.] A square or oblong
cloth of wool, cotton, silk, or other textile or netted fabric, used,
especially by women, as a loose covering for the neck and shoulders.

India shawl, a kind of rich shawl made in India from the wool of the
Cashmere goat. It is woven in pieces, which are sewed together. --
Shawl goat (Zoöl.), the Cashmere goat.

Shawl, v. t. To wrap in a shawl. Thackeray.

Shawm (?), n. [OE. shalmie, OF. chalemie; cf. F. chalumeau shawm,
chaume haulm, stalk; all fr. L. calamus a reed, reed pipe. See Haulm,
and cf. Calumet.] (Mus.) A wind instrument of music, formerly in use,
supposed to have resembled either the clarinet or the hautboy in form.
[Written also shalm, shaum.] Otway.

    Even from the shrillest shaum unto the cornamute.


Drayton.

Shaw`nees" (?), n. pl.; sing. Shawnee (&?;). (Ethnol.) A tribe of North
American Indians who occupied Western New York and part of Ohio, but
were driven away and widely dispersed by the Iroquois.

Shay (?), n. A chaise. [Prov. Eng. & Local, U.S.]

She (?), pron. [sing. nom. She; poss. Her. (&?;) or Hers (&?;); obj.
Her; pl. nom. They (?); poss. Their (?) or Theirs (&?;); obj. Them
(?).] [OE. she, sche, scheo, scho, AS. seó, fem. of the definite
article, originally a demonstrative pronoun; cf. OS. siu, D. zij, G.
sie, OHG. siu, s, si, Icel. s, sj, Goth. si she, s, fem. article, Russ.
siia, fem., this, Gr. &?;, fem. article, Skr. s, sy. The possessive her
or hers, and the objective her, are from a different root. See Her.] 1.
This or that female; the woman understood or referred to; the animal of
the female sex, or object personified as feminine, which was spoken of.

    She loved her children best in every wise.


Chaucer.

    Then Sarah denied, . . . for she was afraid.


Gen. xviii. 15.

2. A woman; a female; -- used substantively. [R.]

    Lady, you are the cruelest she alive.


Shak.

She is used in composition with nouns of common gender, for female, to
denote an animal of the female sex; as, a she-bear; a she-cat.

Shead"ing (?), n. [From AS. scdan, sceádan, to separate, divide. See
Shed, v. t.] A tithing, or division, in the Isle of Man, in which there
is a coroner, or chief constable. The island is divided into six
sheadings.

Sheaf (?), n. (Mech.) A sheave. [R.]

Sheaf, n.; pl. Sheaves (#). [OE. sheef, shef, schef, AS. sceáf; akin to
D. schoof, OHG. scoub, G. schaub, Icel. skauf a fox's brush, and E.
shove. See Shove.] 1. A quantity of the stalks and ears of wheat, rye,
or other grain, bound together; a bundle of grain or straw.

    The reaper fills his greedy hands, And binds the golden sheaves in
    brittle bands.


Dryden.

2. Any collection of things bound together; a bundle; specifically, a
bundle of arrows sufficient to fill a quiver, or the allowance of each
archer, -- usually twenty-four.

    The sheaf of arrows shook and rattled in the case.


Dryden.

Sheaf, v. t. To gather and bind into a sheaf; to make into sheaves; as,
to sheaf wheat.

Sheaf (?), v. i. To collect and bind cut grain, or the like; to make
sheaves.

    They that reap must sheaf and bind.


Shak.

Sheaf"y (?), a. Pertaining to, or consisting of, a sheaf or sheaves;
resembling a sheaf.

Sheal (?), n. Same as Sheeling. [Scot.]

Sheal, v. t. To put under a sheal or shelter. [Scot.]

Sheal, v. t. [See Shell.] To take the husks or pods off from; to shell;
to empty of its contents, as a husk or a pod. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. &
Scot.] Jamieson.

    That's a shealed peascod.


Shak.

Sheal, n. A shell or pod. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Sheal"ing, n. The outer husk, pod, or shell, as of oats, pease, etc.;
sheal; shell. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Sheal"ing, n. Same as Sheeling. [Scot.]

Shear (?), v. t. [imp. Sheared (?) or Shore (&?;);p. p. Sheared or
Shorn (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Shearing.] [OE. sheren, scheren, to shear,
cut, shave, AS. sceran, scieran, scyran; akin to D. & G. scheren, Icel.
skera, Dan. ski&?;re, Gr. &?;&?;&?;. Cf. Jeer, Score, Shard, Share,
Sheer to turn aside.] 1. To cut, clip, or sever anything from with
shears or a like instrument; as, to shear sheep; to shear cloth.

It is especially applied to the cutting of wool from sheep or their
skins, and the nap from cloth.

2. To separate or sever with shears or a similar instrument; to cut
off; to clip (something) from a surface; as, to shear a fleece.

    Before the golden tresses . . . were shorn away.


Shak.

3. To reap, as grain. [Scot.] Jamieson.

4. Fig.: To deprive of property; to fleece.

5. (Mech.) To produce a change of shape in by a shear. See Shear, n.,
4.

Shear, n. [AS. sceara. See Shear, v. t.] 1. A pair of shears; -- now
always used in the plural, but formerly also in the singular. See
Shears.

    On his head came razor none, nor shear.


Chaucer.

    Short of the wool, and naked from the shear.


Dryden.

2. A shearing; -- used in designating the age of sheep.

    After the second shearing, he is a two-shear ram; . . . at the
    expiration of another year, he is a three- shear ram; the name
    always taking its date from the time of shearing.


Youatt.

3. (Engin.) An action, resulting from applied forces, which tends to
cause two contiguous parts of a body to slide relatively to each other
in a direction parallel to their plane of contact; -- also called
shearing stress, and tangential stress.

4. (Mech.) A strain, or change of shape, of an elastic body, consisting
of an extension in one direction, an equal compression in a
perpendicular direction, with an unchanged magnitude in the third
direction.

Shear blade, one of the blades of shears or a shearing machine. --
Shear hulk. See under Hulk. -- Shear steel, a steel suitable for
shears, scythes, and other cutting instruments, prepared from fagots of
blistered steel by repeated heating, rolling, and tilting, to increase
its malleability and fineness of texture.

Shear, v. i. 1. To deviate. See Sheer.

2. (Engin.) To become more or less completely divided, as a body under
the action of forces, by the sliding of two contiguous parts relatively
to each other in a direction parallel to their plane of contact.

Shear"bill`, n. (Zoöl.) The black skimmer. See Skimmer.

Sheard (?), n. See Shard. [Obs.]

Shear"er (?), n. 1. One who shears.

    Like a lamb dumb before his shearer.


Acts viii. 32.

2. A reaper. [Scot.] Jamieson.

Shear"ing, n. 1. The act or operation of clipping with shears or a
shearing machine, as the wool from sheep, or the nap from cloth.

2. The product of the act or operation of clipping with shears or a
shearing machine; as, the whole shearing of a flock; the shearings from
cloth.

3. Same as Shearling. Youatt.

4. The act or operation of reaping. [Scot.]

5. The act or operation of dividing with shears; as, the shearing of
metal plates.

6. The process of preparing shear steel; tilting.

7. (Mining) The process of making a vertical side cutting in working
into a face of coal.

Shearing machine. (a) A machine with blades, or rotary disks, for
dividing plates or bars of metal. (b) A machine for shearing cloth.

Shear"ling (?), n. A sheep but once sheared.

Shear"man (?), n.; pl. Shearmen (&?;). One whose occupation is to shear
cloth.

Shearn (?), n. [AS. scearn. Cf. Scarn.] Dung; excrement. [Obs.]
[Written also shern.] Holland.

Shears (?), n. pl. [Formerly used also in the singular. See Shear, n.,
1.] 1. A cutting instrument. Specifically: (a) An instrument consisting
of two blades, commonly with bevel edges, connected by a pivot, and
working on both sides of the material to be cut, -- used for cutting
cloth and other substances.

    Fate urged the shears, and cut the sylph in twain.


Pope.

(b) A similar instrument the blades of which are extensions of a curved
spring, -- used for shearing sheep or skins. (c) A shearing machine; a
blade, or a set of blades, working against a resisting edge.

2. Anything in the form of shears. Specifically: (a) A pair of wings.
[Obs.] Spenser. (b) An apparatus for raising heavy weights, and
especially for stepping and unstepping the lower masts of ships. It
consists of two or more spars or pieces of timber, fastened together
near the top, steadied by a guy or guys, and furnished with the
necessary tackle. [Written also sheers.]

3. (Mach.) The bedpiece of a machine tool, upon which a table or slide
rest is secured; as, the shears of a lathe or planer. See Illust. under
Lathe.

Rotary shears. See under Rotary.

Shear"tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The common tern. (b) Any one of several
species of humming birds of the genus Thaumastura having a long forked
tail.

Shear"wa`ter (?), n. [Shear + water; cf. G. wassersherer; -- so called
from its running lightly along the surface of the water.] (Zoöl.) Any
one of numerous species of long-winged oceanic birds of the genus
Puffinus and related genera. They are allied to the petrels, but are
larger. The Manx shearwater (P. Anglorum), the dusky shearwater (P.
obscurus), and the greater shearwater (P. major), are well-known
species of the North Atlantic. See Hagdon.

Sheat"fish` (?), n. [Cf. dial. G. scheid, schaid, schaiden.] (Zoöl.) A
European siluroid fish (Silurus glanis) allied to the cat-fishes. It is
the largest fresh-water fish of Europe, sometimes becoming six feet or
more in length. See Siluroid.

Sheath (?), n. [OE. schethe, AS. scð, sceáð, scð; akin to OS. skðia, D.
scheede, G. scheide, OHG. sceida, Sw. skida, Dan. skede, Icel. skeiðir,
pl., and to E. shed, v.t., originally meaning, to separate, to part.
See Shed.] 1. A case for the reception of a sword, hunting knife, or
other long and slender instrument; a scabbard.

    The dead knight's sword out of his sheath he drew.


Spenser.

2. Any sheathlike covering, organ, or part. Specifically: (a) (Bot.)
The base of a leaf when sheathing or investing a stem or branch, as in
grasses. (b) (Zoöl.) One of the elytra of an insect.

Medullary sheath. (Anat.) See under Medullary. -- Primitive sheath.
(Anat.) See Neurilemma. -- Sheath knife, a knife with a fixed blade,
carried in a sheath. -- Sheath of Schwann. (Anat.) See Schwann's
sheath.

Sheath"bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Either one of two species of birds
composing the genus Chionis, and family Chionidæ, native of the islands
of the Antarctic seas.

They are related to the gulls and the plovers, but more nearly to the
latter. The base of the bill is covered with a saddle- shaped horny
sheath, and the toes are only slightly webbed. The plumage of both
species is white.

Sheathe (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sheathed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sheating.] [Written also sheath.] 1. To put into a sheath, case, or
scabbard; to inclose or cover with, or as with, a sheath or case.

    The leopard . . . keeps the claws of his fore feet turned up from
    the ground, and sheathed in the skin of his toes.


Grew.

    'T is in my breast she sheathes her dagger now.


Dryden.

2. To fit or furnish, as with a sheath. Shak.

3. To case or cover with something which protects, as thin boards,
sheets of metal, and the like; as, to sheathe a ship with copper.

4. To obtund or blunt, as acrimonious substances, or sharp particles.
[R.] Arbuthnot.

To sheathe the sword, to make peace.

Sheathed (?), a. 1. Povided with, or inclosed in, sheath.

2. (Bot.) Invested by a sheath, or cylindrical membranaceous tube,
which is the base of the leaf, as the stalk or culm in grasses;
vaginate.

Sheath"er (?), n. One who sheathes.

Sheath"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sheatfish.

Sheath"ing (?), p. pr. & a. from Sheathe. Inclosing with a sheath; as,
the sheathing leaves of grasses; the sheathing stipules of many
polygonaceous plants.

Sheath"ing, n. That which sheathes. Specifically: (a) The casing or
covering of a ship's bottom and sides; the materials for such covering;
as, copper sheathing. (b) (Arch.) The first covering of boards on the
outside wall of a frame house or on a timber roof; also, the material
used for covering; ceiling boards in general.

Sheath"less (?), a. Without a sheath or case for covering; unsheathed.

Sheath"-winged` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having elytra, or wing cases, as a
beetle.

Sheath"y (?), a. Forming or resembling a sheath or case. Sir T. Browne.

She"a tree` (?). (Bot.) An African sapotaceous tree (Bassia, or
Butyrospermum, Parkii), from the seeds of which a substance resembling
butter is obtained; the African butter tree.

<! p. 1326 !>

Sheave (?), n. [Akin to OD. schijve orb, disk, wheel, D. schiff, G.
scheibe, Icel. skfa a shaving, slice; cf. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a staff. Cf.
Shift, v., Shive.] A wheel having a groove in the rim for a rope to
work in, and set in a block, mast, or the like; the wheel of a pulley.

Sheave hole, a channel cut in a mast, yard, rail, or other timber, in
which to fix a sheave.

Sheave, v. t. [See Sheaf of straw.] To gather and bind into a sheaf or
sheaves; hence, to collect. Ashmole.

Sheaved (?), a. Made of straw. [Obs.] Shak.

Sheb"an*der (?), n. [Per. shhbandar.] A harbor master, or ruler of a
port, in the East Indies. [Written also shebunder.]

She*bang" (?), n. [Cf. Shebeen.] A jocosely depreciative name for a
dwelling or shop. [Slang,U.S.]

She*been" (?), n. [Of Irish origin; cf. Ir. seapa a shop.] A low public
house; especially, a place where spirits and other excisable liquors
are illegally and privately sold. [Ireland]

She*chi"nah (?), n. See Shekinah.

Sheck"la*ton (?), n. [Cf. Ciclatoun.] A kind of gilt leather. See
Checklaton. [Obs.] Spenser.

Shed (?), n. [The same word as shade. See Shade.] A slight or temporary
structure built to shade or shelter something; a structure usually open
in front; an outbuilding; a hut; as, a wagon shed; a wood shed.

    The first Aletes born in lowly shed.


Fairfax.

    Sheds of reeds which summer's heat repel.


Sandys.

Shed, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shed; p. pr. & vb. n. Shedding.] [OE.
scheden, sch&?;den, to pour, to part, AS. scdan, sceádan, to pert, to
separate; akin to OS. sk&?;&?;an, OFries. sk&?;tha, G. scheiden, OHG.
sceidan, Goth. skaidan, and probably to Lith. skëdu I part, separate,
L. scindere to cleave, to split, Gr. &?;&?;&?;, Skr. chid, and perch.
also to L. caedere to cut. &radic;159. Cf. Chisel, Concise, Schism,
Sheading, Sheath, Shide.] 1. To separate; to divide. [Obs. or Prov.
Eng.] Robert of Brunne.

2. To part with; to throw off or give forth from one's self; to emit;
to diffuse; to cause to emanate or flow; to pour forth or out; to
spill; as, the sun sheds light; she shed tears; the clouds shed rain.

    Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?


Shak.

    Twice seven consenting years have shed Their utmost bounty on thy
    head.


Wordsworth.

3. To let fall; to throw off, as a natural covering of hair, feathers,
shell; to cast; as, fowls shed their feathers; serpents shed their
skins; trees shed leaves.

4. To cause to flow off without penetrating; as, a tight roof, or
covering of oiled cloth, sheeds water.

5. To sprinkle; to intersperse; to cover. [R.] "Her hair . . . is shed
with gray." B. Jonson.

6. (Weaving) To divide, as the warp threads, so as to form a shed, or
passageway, for the shuttle.

Shed, v. i. 1. To fall in drops; to pour. [Obs.]

    Such a rain down from the welkin shadde.


Chaucer.

2. To let fall the parts, as seeds or fruit; to throw off a covering or
envelope.

    White oats are apt to shed most as they lie, and black as they
    stand.


Mortimer.

Shed, n. 1. A parting; a separation; a division. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

    They say also that the manner of making the shed of newwedded
    wives' hair with the iron head of a javelin came up then likewise.


Sir T. North.

2. The act of shedding or spilling; -- used only in composition, as in
bloodshed.

3. That which parts, divides, or sheds; -- used in composition, as in
watershed.

4. (Weaving) The passageway between the threads of the warp through
which the shuttle is thrown, having a sloping top and bottom made by
raising and lowering the alternate threads.

Shed"der (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, sheds; as, a shedder of
blood; a shedder of tears.

2. (Zoöl.) A crab in the act of casting its shell, or immediately
afterwards while still soft; -- applied especially to the edible crabs,
which are most prized while in this state.

Shed"ding (?), n. 1. The act of shedding, separating, or casting off or
out; as, the shedding of blood.

2. That which is shed, or cast off. [R.] Wordsworth.

{ Sheel"fa (?), Shil"fa (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) The chaffinch; -- so named
from its call note. [Prov. Eng.]

Sheel"ing (?), n. [Icel. skjl a shelter, a cover; akin to Dan. & Sw.
skjul.] A hut or small cottage in an exposed or a retired place (as on
a mountain or at the seaside) such as is used by shepherds, fishermen,
sportsmen, etc.; a summer cottage; also, a shed. [Written also sheel,
shealing, sheiling, etc.] [Scot.]

Sheel"y (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sheelfa.

Sheen (?), a. [OE. sehene, AS. sciéne, sc&?;ne, sc&?;ne, splendid,
beautiful; akin to OFries. sk&?;ne, sk&?;ne, OS. sc&?;ni, D. schoon, G.
schön, OHG. sc&?;ni, Goth, skanus, and E. shew; the original meaning
being probably, visible, worth seeing. It is not akin to E. shine. See
Shew, v. t.] Bright; glittering; radiant; fair; showy; sheeny. [R.,
except in poetry.]

    This holy maiden, that is so bright and sheen.


Chaucer.

    Up rose each warrier bold and brave, Glistening in filed steel and
    armor sheen.


Fairfax.

Sheen, v. i. To shine; to glisten. [Poetic]

    This town, That, sheening far, celestial seems to be.


Byron.

Sheen, n. Brightness; splendor; glitter. "Throned in celestial sheen."
Milton.

Sheen""ly, adv. Brightly. [R.] Mrs. Browning.

Sheen"y (?), a. Bright; shining; radiant; sheen. "A sheeny summer
morn." Tennyson.

Sheep (?), n. sing. & pl. [OE. shep, scheep, AS. sc&?;p, sceáp; akin to
OFries. sk&?;p, LG. & D. schaap, G. schaf, OHG. scf, Skr. chga.
&radic;295. Cf. Sheepherd.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of
ruminants of the genus Ovis, native of the higher mountains of both
hemispheres, but most numerous in Asia.

The domestic sheep (Ovis aries) varies much in size, in the length and
texture of its wool, the form and size of its horns, the length of its
tail, etc. It was domesticated in prehistoric ages, and many distinct
breeds have been produced; as the merinos, celebrated for their fine
wool; the Cretan sheep, noted for their long horns; the fat-tailed, or
Turkish, sheep, remarkable for the size and fatness of the tail, which
often has to be supported on trucks; the Southdowns, in which the horns
are lacking; and an Asiatic breed which always has four horns.

2. A weak, bashful, silly fellow. Ainsworth.

3. pl. Fig.: The people of God, as being under the government and
protection of Christ, the great Shepherd.

Rocky mountain sheep.(Zoöl.) See Bighorn. -- Maned sheep. (Zoöl.) See
Aoudad. -- Sheep bot (Zoöl.), the larva of the sheep botfly. See
Estrus. -- Sheep dog (Zoöl.), a shepherd dog, or collie. -- Sheep
laurel (Bot.), a small North American shrub (Kalmia angustifolia) with
deep rose-colored flowers in corymbs. -- Sheep pest (Bot.), an
Australian plant (Acæna ovina) related to the burnet. The fruit is
covered with barbed spines, by which it adheres to the wool of sheep.
-- Sheep run, an extensive tract of country where sheep range and
graze. -- Sheep's beard (Bot.), a cichoraceous herb (Urospermum
Dalechampii) of Southern Europe; -- so called from the conspicuous
pappus of the achenes. -- Sheep's bit (Bot.), a European herb (Jasione
montana) having much the appearance of scabious. -- Sheep pox (Med.), a
contagious disease of sheep, characterixed by the development of
vesicles or pocks upon the skin. -- Sheep scabious. (Bot.) Same as
Sheep's bit. -- Sheep shears, shears in which the blades form the two
ends of a steel bow, by the elasticity of which they open as often as
pressed together by the hand in cutting; -- so called because used to
cut off the wool of sheep. -- Sheep sorrel. (Bot.), a prerennial herb
(Rumex Acetosella) growing naturally on poor, dry, gravelly soil. Its
leaves have a pleasant acid taste like sorrel. -- Sheep's-wool (Zoöl.),
the highest grade of Florida commercial sponges (Spongia equina,
variety gossypina). -- Sheep tick (Zoöl.), a wingless parasitic insect
(Melophagus ovinus) belonging to the Diptera. It fixes its proboscis in
the skin of the sheep and sucks the blood, leaving a swelling. Called
also sheep pest, and sheep louse. -- Sheep walk, a pasture for sheep; a
sheep run. -- Wild sheep. (Zoöl.) See Argali, Mouflon, and Oörial.

Sheep"back` (?), n. (Geol.) A rounded knoll of rock resembling the back
of a sheep. -- produced by glacial action. Called also roche moutonnée;
-- usually in the plural.

Sheep"ber`ry (?), n. (Bot.) The edible fruit of a small North American
tree of the genus Viburnum (V. Lentago), having white flowers in flat
cymes; also, the tree itself. Called also nannyberry.

Sheep"bite` (?), v. i. To bite or nibble like a sheep; hence, to
practice petty thefts. [Obs.] Shak.

Sheep"bit`er (?), n. One who practices petty thefts. [Obs.] Shak.

    There are political sheepbiters as well as pastoral; betrayers of
    public trusts as well as of private.


L'Estrange.

{ Sheep"cot` (?), Sheep"cote` (?), } n. A small inclosure for sheep; a
pen; a fold.

Sheep"-faced` (?), a. Over-bashful; sheepish.

Sheep"fold` (?), n. A fold or pen for sheep; a place where sheep are
collected or confined.

Sheep"-head`ed (?), a. Silly; simple-minded; stupid. Taylor (1630)

Sheep"hook` (?), n. A hook fastened to pole, by which shepherds lay
hold on the legs or necks of their sheep; a shepherd's crook. Dryden.

Sheep"ish, a. 1. Of or pertaining to sheep. [Obs.]

2. Like a sheep; bashful; over-modest; meanly or foolishly diffident;
timorous to excess.

    Wanting change of company, he will, when he comes abroad, be a
    sheepish or conceited creature.


Locke.

-- Sheep"ish*ly, adv. -- Sheep"ish*ness, n.

Sheep"mas`ter (?), n. A keeper or feeder of sheep; also, an owner of
sheep. 2 Kings iii. 4.

Sheep"rack` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The starling.

Sheep's"-eye` (?), n. A modest, diffident look; a loving glance; --
commonly in the plural.

    I saw her just now give him the languishing eye, as they call it; .
    . . of old called the sheep's-eye.


Wycherley.

Sheep's-foot` (?), n. A printer's tool consisting of a metal bar formed
into a hammer head at one end and a claw at the other, -- used as a
lever and hammer.

Sheep"shank` (?), n. (Naut.) A hitch by which a rope may be temporarily
shortened.

Sheeps"head` (&?;), n. [So called because of the fancied resemblance of
its head and front teeth to those of a sheep.] (Zoöl.) A large and
valuable sparoid food fish (Archosargus, or Diplodus, probatocephalus)
found on the Atlantic coast of the United States. It often weighs from
ten to twelve pounds.

The name is also locally, in a loose way, applied to various other
fishes, as the butterfish, the fresh-water drumfish, the parrot fish,
the porgy, and the moonfish.

Sheep"-shear`er (?), n. One who shears, or cuts off the wool from,
sheep.

Sheep"-shear`ing (?), n. 1. Act of shearing sheep.

2. A feast at the time of sheep- shearing. Shak.

Sheep"skin` (?), n. 1. The skin of a sheep; or, leather prepared from
it.

2. A diploma; -- so called because usually written or printed on
parchment prepared from the skin of the sheep. [College Cant]

Sheep"split` (?), n. A split of a sheepskin; one of the thin sections
made by splitting a sheepskin with a cutting knife or machine.

Sheep"y (?), a. Resembling sheep; sheepish. Testament of Love.

Sheer (?), a. [OE. shere, skere, pure, bright, Icel. sk&?;rr; akin to
skrr, AS. scr, OS. skri, MHG. schr, G. schier, Dan. sk&?;r, Sw. skär,
Goth. skeirs clear, and E. shine. &radic;157. See Shine, v. i.] 1.
Bright; clear; pure; unmixed. "Sheer ale." Shak.

    Thou sheer, immaculate, and silver fountain.


Shak.

2. Very thin or transparent; -- applied to fabrics; as, sheer muslin.

3. Being only what it seems to be; obvious; simple; mere; downright;
as, sheer folly; sheer nonsense. "A sheer impossibility." De Quincey.

    It is not a sheer advantage to have several strings to one's bow.


M. Arnold.

4. Stright up and down; vertical; prpendicular.

    A sheer precipice of a thousand feet.


J. D. Hooker.

    It was at least Nine roods of sheer ascent.


Wordsworth.

Sheer, adv. Clean; quite; at once. [Obs.] Milton.

Sheer, v. t. [See Shear.] To shear. [Obs.] Dryden.

Sheer, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sheered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sheering.] [D.
sheren to shear, cut, withdraw, warp. See Shear.] To decline or deviate
from the line of the proper course; to turn aside; to swerve; as, a
ship sheers from her course; a horse sheers at a bicycle.

To sheer off, to turn or move aside to a distance; to move away. -- To
sheer up, to approach obliquely.

Sheer, n. 1. (Naut.) (a) The longitudinal upward curvature of the deck,
gunwale, and lines of a vessel, as when viewed from the side. (b) The
position of a vessel riding at single anchor and swinging clear of it.

2. A turn or change in a course.

    Give the canoe a sheer and get nearer to the shore.


Cooper.

3. pl. Shears See Shear.

Sheer batten (Shipbuilding), a long strip of wood to guide the
carpenters in following the sheer plan. -- Sheer boom, a boom slanting
across a stream to direct floating logs to one side. -- Sheer hulk. See
Shear hulk, under Hulk. -- Sheer plan, or Sheer draught (Shipbuilding),
a projection of the lines of a vessel on a vertical longitudinal plane
passing through the middle line of the vessel. -- Sheer pole (Naut.),
an iron rod lashed to the shrouds just above the dead-eyes and parallel
to the ratlines. -- Sheer strake (Shipbuilding), the strake under the
gunwale on the top side. Totten. -- To break sheer (Naut.), to deviate
from sheer, and risk fouling the anchor.

Sheer"ly (?), adv. At once; absolutely. [Obs.]

Sheer"wa`ter (?), n. (Zoöl.) The shearwater.

Sheet (?), n. [OE. shete, schete, AS. scte, scte, fr. sceát a
projecting corner, a fold in a garment (akin to D. schoot sheet, bosom,
lap, G. schoss bosom, lap, flap of a coat, Icel. skaut, Goth. skauts
the hem of a garment); originally, that which shoots out, from the root
of AS. sceótan to shoot. &radic;159. See Shoot, v. t.] In general, a
large, broad piece of anything thin, as paper, cloth, etc.; a broad,
thin portion of any substance; an expanded superficies. Specifically:
(a) A broad piece of cloth, usually linen or cotton, used for wrapping
the body or for a covering; especially, one used as an article of
bedding next to the body.

    He fell into a trance, and saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel
    descending unto him, as it had been a great sheet knit at the four
    corners.


Acts x. 10, 11.

    If I do die before thee, prithee, shroud me In one of those same
    sheets.


Shak.

(b) A broad piece of paper, whether folded or unfolded, whether blank
or written or printed upon; hence, a letter; a newspaper, etc. (c) A
single signature of a book or a pamphlet; in pl., the book itself.

    To this the following sheets are intended for a full and distinct
    answer.


Waterland.

(d) A broad, thinly expanded portion of metal or other substance; as, a
sheet of copper, of glass, or the like; a plate; a leaf. (e) A broad
expanse of water, or the like. "The two beautiful sheets of water."
Macaulay. (f) A sail. Dryden. (g) (Geol.) An extensive bed of an
eruptive rock intruded between, or overlying, other strata.

2. [AS. sceáta. See the Etymology above.] (Naut.) (a) A rope or chain
which regulates the angle of adjustment of a sail in relation in
relation to the wind; -- usually attached to the lower corner of a
sail, or to a yard or a boom. (b) pl. The space in the forward or the
after part of a boat where there are no rowers; as, fore sheets; stern
sheets.

Sheet is often used adjectively, or in combination, to denote that the
substance to the name of which it is prefixed is in the form of sheets,
or thin plates or leaves; as, sheet brass, or sheet-brass; sheet glass,
or sheet-glass; sheet gold, or sheet-gold; sheet iron, or sheet- iron,
etc.

A sheet in the wind, half drunk. [Sailors' Slang] -- Both sheets in the
wind, very drunk. [Sailors' Slang] -- In sheets, lying flat or
expanded; not folded, or folded but not bound; -- said especially of
printed sheets. -- Sheet bend (Naut.), a bend or hitch used for
temporarily fastening a rope to the bight of another rope or to an eye.
-- Sheet lightning, Sheet piling, etc. See under Lightning, Piling,
etc.

Sheet, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sheeted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sheeting.] 1. To
furnish with a sheet or sheets; to wrap in, or cover with, a sheet, or
as with a sheet. "The sheeted dead." "When snow the pasture sheets."
Shak.

<! p. 1327 !>

2. To expand, as a sheet.

    The star shot flew from the welkin blue, As it fell from the
    sheeted sky.


J. R. Drake.

To sheet home (Naut.), to haul upon a sheet until the sail is as flat,
and the clew as near the wind, as possible.

Sheet" an"chor (?). [OE. scheten to shoot, AS. sceótan; cf. OE. shoot
anchor. See Shoot, v. t.] 1. (Naut.) A large anchor stowed on shores
outside the waist of a vessel; -- called also waist anchor. See the
Note under Anchor.

2. Anything regarded as a sure support or dependence in danger; the
best hope or refuge.

Sheet" ca"ble (?). (Naut.) The cable belonging to the sheet anchor.

Sheet" chain" (?). (Naut.) A chain sheet cable.

Sheet"ful (?), n.; pl. Sheetfuls (&?;). Enough to fill a sheet; as much
as a sheet can hold.

Sheet"ing, n. 1. Cotton or linen cloth suitable for bed sheets. It is
sometimes made of double width.

2. (Hydraul. Engin.) A lining of planks or boards (rarely of metal) for
protecting an embankment.

3. The act or process of forming into sheets, or flat pieces; also,
material made into sheets.

||Sheik (?), n. [Ar. sheikh, shaykh, a venerable old man, a chief, fr.
||shkha to grow or be old.] The head of an Arab family, or of a clan or
||a tribe; also, the chief magistrate of an Arab village. The name is
||also applied to Mohammedan ecclesiastics of a high grade. [Written
||also scheik, shaik, sheikh.]

{ Sheil (shl), Sheil"ing, } n. See Sheeling.

Shek"el (?), n. [Heb. shegel, fr. shgal to weigh.] 1. An ancient weight
and coin used by the Jews and by other nations of the same stock.

A common estimate makes the shekel equal in weight to about 130 grains
for gold, 224 grains for silver, and 450 grains for copper, and the
approximate values of the coins are (gold) $5.00, (silver) 60 cents,
and (copper half shekel), one and one half cents.

2. pl. A jocose term for money.

She*ki"nah (?), n. [Heb Talmud sheknh, fr. shkan to inhabit.] The
visible majesty of the Divine Presence, especially when resting or
dwelling between the cherubim on the mercy seat, in the Tabernacle, or
in the Temple of Solomon; -- a term used in the Targums and by the
later Jews, and adopted by Christians. [Written also Shechinah.] Dr. W.
Smith (Bib. Dict.)

Sheld (?), a. [OE., fr. sheld a shield, probably in allusion to the
ornamentation of shields. See Shield.] Variegated; spotted; speckled;
piebald. [Prov. Eng.]

{ Sheld"a*fle (?), Sheld"a*ple (?), } n. [Perhaps for sheld dapple. Cf.
Sheldrake.] (Zoöl.) A chaffinch. [Written also sheldapple, and
shellapple.]

Sheld"fowl` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The common sheldrake. [Prov. Eng.]

Shel"drake` (?), n. [Sheld + drake.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of several
species of large Old World ducks of the genus Tadorna and allied
genera, especially the European and Asiatic species. (T. cornuta, or
tadorna), which somewhat resembles a goose in form and habit, but
breeds in burrows.

It has the head and neck greenish black, the breast, sides, and forward
part of the back brown, the shoulders and middle of belly black, the
speculum green, and the bill and frontal bright red. Called also
shelduck, shellduck, sheldfowl, skeelduck, bergander, burrow duck, and
links goose.

The Australian sheldrake (Tadorna radja) has the head, neck, breast,
flanks, and wing coverts white, the upper part of the back and a band
on the breast deep chestnut, and the back and tail black. The chestnut
sheldrake of Australia (Casarca tadornoides) is varied with black and
chestnut, and has a dark green head and neck. The ruddy sheldrake, or
Braminy duck (C. rutila), and the white-winged sheldrake (C.
leucoptera), are related Asiatic species.

2. Any one of the American mergansers.

The name is also loosely applied to other ducks, as the canvasback, and
the shoveler.

Shel"duck` (?), n. [Sheld variegated + duck.] (Zoöl.) The sheldrake.
[Written also shellduck.]

Shelf (?), n.; pl. Shelves (#). [OE. shelfe, schelfe, AS. scylfe; akin
to G. schelfe, Icel. skjlf. In senses 2 & 3, perhaps a different word
(cf. Shelve, v. i.).] 1. (Arch.) A flat tablet or ledge of any material
set horizontally at a distance from the floor, to hold objects of use
or ornament.

2. A sand bank in the sea, or a rock, or ledge of rocks, rendering the
water shallow, and dangerous to ships.

    On the tawny sands and shelves.


Milton.

    On the secret shelves with fury cast.


Dryden.

3. (Mining) A stratum lying in a very even manner; a flat, projecting
layer of rock.

4. (Naut.) A piece of timber running the whole length of a vessel
inside the timberheads. D. Kemp.

To lay on the shelf, to lay aside as unnecessary or useless; to
dismiss; to discard.

Shelf"y (?), a. 1. Abounding in shelves; full of dangerous shallows. "A
shelfy coast." Dryden.

2. Full of strata of rock. [Obs.]

    The tillable fields are in some places . . . so shelfy that the
    corn hath much ado to fasten its root.


Carew.

Shell (?), n. [OE. shelle, schelle, AS. scell, scyll; akin to D. shel,
Icel. skel, Goth. skalja a tile, and E. skill. Cf. Scale of fishes,
Shale, Skill.] 1. A hard outside covering, as of a fruit or an animal.
Specifically: (a) The covering, or outside part, of a nut; as, a
hazelnut shell. (b) A pod. (c) The hard covering of an egg.

    Think him as a serpent's egg, . . . And kill him in the shell.


Shak.

(d) (Zoöl.) The hard calcareous or chitinous external covering of
mollusks, crustaceans, and some other invertebrates. In some mollusks,
as the cuttlefishes, it is internal, or concealed by the mantle. Also,
the hard covering of some vertebrates, as the armadillo, the tortoise,
and the like. (e) (Zoöl.) Hence, by extension, any mollusks having such
a covering.

2. (Mil.) A hollow projectile, of various shapes, adapted for a mortar
or a cannon, and containing an explosive substance, ignited with a fuse
or by percussion, by means of which the projectile is burst and its
fragments scattered. See Bomb.

3. The case which holds the powder, or charge of powder and shot, used
with breechloading small arms.

4. Any slight hollow structure; a framework, or exterior structure,
regarded as not complete or filled in; as, the shell of a house.

5. A coarse kind of coffin; also, a thin interior coffin inclosed in a
more substantial one. Knight.

6. An instrument of music, as a lyre, -- the first lyre having been
made, it is said, by drawing strings over a tortoise shell.

    When Jubal struck the chorded shell.


Dryden.

7. An engraved copper roller used in print works.

8. pl. The husks of cacao seeds, a decoction of which is often used as
a substitute for chocolate, cocoa, etc.

9. (Naut.) The outer frame or case of a block within which the sheaves
revolve.

10. A light boat the frame of which is covered with thin wood or with
paper; as, a racing shell.

Message shell, a bombshell inside of which papers may be put, in order
to convey messages. -- Shell bit, a tool shaped like a gouge, used with
a brace in boring wood. See Bit, n., 3. -- Shell button. (a) A button
made of shell. (b) A hollow button made of two pieces, as of metal, one
for the front and the other for the back, -- often covered with cloth,
silk, etc. -- Shell cameo, a cameo cut in shell instead of stone. --
Shell flower. (Bot.) Same as Turtlehead. -- Shell gland. (Zoöl.) (a) A
glandular organ in which the rudimentary shell is formed in embryonic
mollusks. (b) A glandular organ which secretes the eggshells of various
worms, crustacea, mollusks, etc. -- Shell gun, a cannon suitable for
throwing shells. -- Shell ibis (Zoöl.), the openbill of India. -- Shell
jacket, an undress military jacket. -- Shell lime, lime made by burning
the shells of shellfish. -- Shell marl (Min.), a kind of marl
characterized by an abundance of shells, or fragments of shells. --
Shell meat, food consisting of shellfish, or testaceous mollusks.
Fuller. -- Shell mound. See under Mound. -- Shell of a boiler, the
exterior of a steam boiler, forming a case to contain the water and
steam, often inclosing also flues and the furnace; the barrel of a
cylindrical, or locomotive, boiler. -- Shell road, a road of which the
surface or bed is made of shells, as oyster shells. -- Shell sand,
minute fragments of shells constituting a considerable part of the
seabeach in some places.

Shell, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shelled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shelling.] 1.
To strip or break off the shell of; to take out of the shell, pod,
etc.; as, to shell nuts or pease; to shell oysters.

2. To separate the kernels of (an ear of Indian corn, wheat, oats,
etc.) from the cob, ear, or husk.

3. To throw shells or bombs upon or into; to bombard; as, to shell a
town.

To shell out, to distribute freely; to bring out or pay, as money.
[Colloq.]

Shell, v. i. 1. To fall off, as a shell, crust, etc.

2. To cast the shell, or exterior covering; to fall out of the pod or
husk; as, nuts shell in falling.

3. To be disengaged from the ear or husk; as, wheat or rye shells in
reaping.

{ Shell"-lac`, Shel"lac` } (?), n. [Shell + lac a resinous substance;
cf. D. shellak, G. schellack.] See the Note under 2d Lac.

Shell"ap`ple, n. (Zoöl.) See Sheldafle.

Shell"bark` (?), n. (Bot.) A species of hickory (Carya alba) whose
outer bark is loose and peeling; a shagbark; also, its nut.

Shelled (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a shell.

Shell"er (?), n. One who, or that which, shells; as, an oyster sheller;
a corn sheller.

Shell"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any aquatic animal whose external covering
consists of a shell, either testaceous, as in oysters, clams, and other
mollusks, or crustaceous, as in lobsters and crabs.

Shell"ing, n. Groats; hulled oats. Simmonds.

Shell"-less, a. Having no shell. J. Burroughs.

Shell"proof` (?), a. Capable of resisting bombs or other shells;
bombproof.

Shell"work` (?), n. Work composed of shells, or adorned with them.
Cotgrave.

Shell"y (?), a. Abounding with shells; consisting of shells, or of a
shell. "The shelly shore." Prior.

    Shrinks backward in his shelly cave.


Shak.

Shel"ter (?), n. [Cf. OE. scheltrun, shiltroun, schelltrome,
scheldtrome, a guard, squadron, AS. scildtruma a troop of men with
shields; scild shield + truma a band of men. See Shield, n.] 1. That
which covers or defends from injury or annoyance; a protection; a
screen.

    The sick and weak the healing plant shall aid, From storms a
    shelter, and from heat a shade.


Pope.

2. One who protects; a guardian; a defender.

    Thou [God] hast been a shelter for me.


Ps. lxi. 3.

3. The state of being covered and protected; protection; security.

    Who into shelter takes their tender bloom.


Young.

Shelter tent,a small tent made of pieces of cotton duck arranged to
button together. In field service the soldiers carry the pieces.

Syn. -- Asylum; refuge; retreat; covert; sanctuary; protection;
defense; security.

Shel"ter (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sheltered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sheltering.] 1. To be a shelter for; to provide with a shelter; to
cover from injury or annoyance; to shield; to protect.

    Those ruins sheltered once his sacred head.


Dryden.

    You have no convents . . . in which such persons may be received
    and sheltered.


Southey.

2. To screen or cover from notice; to disguise.

    In vain I strove to cheek my growing flame, Or shelter passion
    under friendship's name.


Prior.

3. To betake to cover, or to a safe place; -- used reflexively.

    They sheltered themselves under a rock.


Abp. Abbot.

Shel"ter, v. i. To take shelter.

    There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat, Shelters in cool.


Milton.

Shel"ter*less, a. Destitute of shelter or protection.

    Now sad and shelterless perhaps she lies.


Rowe.

Shel"ter*y (?), a. Affording shelter. [R.]

{ Shel"tie (?), Shel"ty (?) }, n. A Shetland pony.

Shelve (?), v. t. 1. To furnish with shelves; as, to shelve a closet or
a library.

2. To place on a shelf. Hence: To lay on the shelf; to put aside; to
dismiss from service; to put off indefinitely; as, to shelve an
officer; to shelve a claim.

Shelve, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shelved (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shelving.]
[Perhapss originally from the same source as shallow, but influenced by
shelf a ledge, a platform.] To incline gradually; to be slopping; as,
the bottom shelves from the shore.

Shelv"ing, a. Sloping gradually; inclining; as, a shelving shore. Shak.
"Shelving arches." Addison.

Shelv"ing, n. 1. The act of fitting up shelves; as, the job of shelving
a closet.

2. The act of laying on a shelf, or on the shelf; putting off or aside;
as, the shelving of a claim.

3. Material for shelves; shelves, collectively.

Shelv"y (?), a. Sloping gradually; shelving.

    The shore was shelving and shallow.


Shak.

Shem"ite (?), n. A descendant of Shem.

{ Shem*it"ic (?), Shem"i*tish (?), } a. Of or pertaining to Shem, the
son of Noah, or his descendants. See Semitic.

Shem"i*tism (?), n. See Semitism.

Shend (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shent (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shending.]
[AS. scendan to disgrace, bring to shame, from sceand, sceond,
disgrace, dishonor, shame; akin to G. schande, Goth. skanda. See Shame,
n.] 1. To injure, mar, spoil, or harm. [Obs.] "Loss of time shendeth
us." Chaucer.

    I fear my body will be shent.


Dryden.

2. To blame, reproach, or revile; to degrade, disgrace, or put to
shame. [Archaic] R. Browning.

    The famous name of knighthood foully shend.


Spenser.

    She passed the rest as Cynthia doth shend The lesser stars.


Spenser.

Shend"ful (?), a. Destructive; ruinous; disgraceful. [Obs.] --
Shend"ful*ly, adv. [Obs.] Fabyan.

Shend"ship, n. Harm; ruin; also, reproach; disgrace. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Shent (?), obs. 3d pers. sing. pres. of Shend, for shendeth. Chaucer.

Shent, v. t. To shend. [Obs.] Chaucer.

She"ol (sh"l), n. [Heb. shl.] The place of departed spirits; Hades;
also, the grave.

    For thou wilt not leave my soul to sheol.


Ps. xvi. 10. (Rev. Ver.)

Shep"en (?), n. A stable; a shippen. [Obs.]

    The shepne brenning with the blacke smoke.


Chaucer.

Shep"herd (?), n. [OE. schepherde, schephirde, AS. sceáphyrde; sceáp
sheep + hyrde, hirde, heorde, a herd, a guardian. See Sheep, and Herd.]
1. A man employed in tending, feeding, and guarding sheep, esp. a flock
grazing at large.

2. The pastor of a church; one with the religious guidance of others.

Shepherd bird (Zoöl.), the crested screamer. See Screamer. -- Shepherd
dog (Zoöl.), a breed of dogs used largely for the herding and care of
sheep. There are several kinds, as the collie, or Scotch shepherd dog,
and the English shepherd dog. Called also shepherd's dog. -- Shepherd
dog, a name of Pan. Keats. -- Shepherd kings, the chiefs of a nomadic
people who invaded Egypt from the East in the traditional period, and
conquered it, at least in part. They were expelled after about five
hundred years, and attempts have been made to connect their expulsion
with narrative in the book of Exodus. -- Shepherd's club (Bot.), the
common mullein. See Mullein. -- Shepherd's crook, a long staff having
the end curved so as to form a large hook, -- used by shepherds. --
Shepherd's needle (Bot.), the lady's comb. -- Shepherd's plaid, a kind
of woolen cloth of a checkered black and white pattern. -- Shephered
spider (Zoöl.), a daddy longlegs, or harvestman. -- Shepherd's pouch,
or Shepherd's purse (Bot.), an annual cruciferous plant (Capsella
Bursapastoris) bearing small white flowers and pouchlike pods. See
Illust. of Silicle. -- Shepherd's rod, or Shepherd's staff (Bot.), the
small teasel.

Shep"herd, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shepherded; p. pr. & vb. n.
Shepherding.] To tend as a shepherd; to guard, herd, lead, or drive, as
a shepherd. [Poetic]

    White, fleecy clouds . . .


    Shepherded by the slow, unwilling wind.


Shelley.

Shep"herd*ess, n. A woman who tends sheep; hence, a rural lass.

    She put herself into the garb of a shepherdess.


Sir P. Sidney.

Shep*her"di*a (?), n.; pl. Shepherdias (#). [NL. So called from John
Shepherd, an English botanist.] (Bot.) A genus of shrubs having silvery
scurfy leaves, and belonging to the same family as Elæagnus; also, any
plant of this genus. See Buffalo berry, under Buffalo.

<! p. 1328 !>

Shep"herd*ish (?), n. Resembling a shepherd; suiting a shepherd;
pastoral. Sir T. Sidney.

Shep"herd*ism (?), n. Pastoral life or occupation.

Shep"herd*ling (?), n. A little shepherd.

Shep"herd*ly (?), a. Resembling, or becoming to, a shepherd; pastoral;
rustic. [R.] Jer. Taylor.

Shep"ster (?), n. A seamstress. [Obs.] Caxton.

Sher"bet (?), n. [Ar. sherbet, shorbet, sharbat, properly, one drink or
sip, a draught, beverage, from shariba to drink. Cf. Sorbet, Sirup,
Shrub a drink.] 1. A refreshing drink, common in the East, made of the
juice of some fruit, diluted, sweetened, and flavored in various ways;
as, orange sherbet; lemon sherbet; raspberry sherbet, etc.

2. A flavored water ice.

3. A preparation of bicarbonate of soda, tartaric acid, sugar, etc.,
variously flavored, for making an effervescing drink; -- called also
sherbet powder.

Sherd (?), n. A fragment; -- now used only in composition, as in
potsherd. See Shard.

    The thigh . . . which all in sherds it drove.


Chapman.

{ ||Sher"eef (?), ||Sher"if (?), } n. [Ar. sherf noble, holy, n., a
prince.] A member of an Arab princely family descended from Mohammed
through his son-in-law Ali and daughter Fatima. The Grand Shereef is
the governor of Mecca.

||Sher"i*at (?), n. [Turk. sher 'at] The sacred law of the Turkish
||empire.

Sher"iff, n. [OE. shereve, AS. scr-ger&?;fa; scr a shire + ger&?;fa a
reeve. See Shire, and Reeve, and cf. Shrievalty.] The chief officer of
a shire or county, to whom is intrusted the execution of the laws, the
serving of judicial writs and processes, and the preservation of the
peace.

In England, sheriffs are appointed by the king. In the United States,
sheriffs are elected by the legislature or by the citizens, or
appointed and commissioned by the executive of the State. The office of
sheriff in England is judicial and ministerial. In the United States,
it is mainly ministerial. The sheriff, by himself or his deputies,
executes civil and criminal process throughout the county, has charge
of the jail and prisoners, attends courts, and keeps the peace. His
judicial authority is generally confined to ascertaining damages on
writs of inquiry and the like. Sheriff, in Scotland, called sheriff
depute, is properly a judge, having also certain ministerial powers.
Sheriff clerk is the clerk of the Sheriff's Court in Scotland.
Sheriff's Court in London is a tribunal having cognizance of certain
personal actions in that city. Wharton, Tomlins. Erskine.

{ Sher"iff*al*ty (?), Sher"iff*dom (?), Sher"iff*ry (?), Sher"iff*ship
(?), Sher"iff*wick (?), n. } The office or jurisdiction of sheriff. See
Shrievalty.

Shern (?), n. See Shearn. [Obs.]

Sher"ris (?), n. Sherry. [Obs.] Shak.

Sher"ry (?), n. [So called from Xeres, a Spanish town near Cadiz, x in
Spanish having been formerly pronounced like sh in English.] A Spanish
light-colored dry wine, made in Andalusia. As prepared for commerce it
is colored a straw color or a deep amber by mixing with it cheap wine
boiled down.

Sherry cobbler, a beverage prepared with sherry wine, water, lemon or
orange, sugar, ice, etc., and usually imbided through a straw or a
glass tube.

Sher"ry*val`lies (?), n. pl. [Cf. Sp. zaraquelles wide breeches or
overalls.] Trousers or overalls of thick cloth or leather, buttoned on
the outside of each leg, and generally worn to protect other trousers
when riding on horseback. [Local, U.S.] Bartlett.

Shet (?), v. t. & i. [imp. Shet. (Obs. Shette (&?; or &?;)); p. pr.
Shet; p. pr. & vb. n. Shetting.] To shut. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.] Chaucer.

Shete (?), v. t. & i. To shoot. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sheth (?), n. The part of a plow which projects downward beneath the
beam, for holding the share and other working parts; -- also called
standard, or post.

Shet"land po"ny (?). One of a small, hardy breed of horses, with long
mane and tail, which originated in the Shetland Islands; a sheltie.

Shew (?), v. t. & i. See Show.

Shew, n. Show. [Obs. except in shewbread.]

Shew"bread` (?). See Showbread.

Shew"el (?), n. A scarecrow. [Obs.] Trench.

Shew"er (?), n. One who shews. See Shower.

Shewn (?), p. p. of Shew.

Shi"ah (?), n. Same as Shiite.

Shib"bo*leth (?), n. [Heb. shibbleth an ear of corn, or a stream, a
flood.] 1. A word which was made the criterion by which to distinguish
the Ephraimites from the Gileadites. The Ephraimites, not being able to
pronounce sh, called the word sibboleth. See Judges xii.

    Without reprieve, adjudged to death, For want of well pronouncing
    shibboleth.


Milton.

Also in an extended sense.

    The th, with its twofold value, is . . . the shibboleth of
    foreigners.


Earle.

2. Hence, the criterion, test, or watchword of a party; a party cry or
pet phrase.

Shide (?), n. [OE. shide, schide, AS. scde; akin to OHG. sct, G.
scheit, Icel. skð, and E. shed, v.t.] A thin board; a billet of wood; a
splinter. [Prov. Eng.]

Shie (?), v. t. See Shy, to throw.

Shied (?), imp. & p. p. of Shy.

Shiel, n. A sheeling. [Scot.] Burns.

Shield (?), n. [OE. sheld, scheld, AS. scield, scild, sceld, scyld;
akin to OS. scild, OFries. skeld, D. & G. schild, OHG. scilt, Icel.
skjöldr, Sw. sköld, Dan. skiold, Goth. skildus; of uncertain origin.
Cf. Sheldrake.] 1. A broad piece of defensive armor, carried on the
arm, -- formerly in general use in war, for the protection of the body.
See Buckler.

    Now put your shields before your hearts and fight, With hearts more
    proof than shields.


Shak.

2. Anything which protects or defends; defense; shelter; protection.
"My council is my shield." Shak.

3. Figuratively, one who protects or defends.

    Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.


Gen. xv. 1.

4. (Bot.) In lichens, a Hardened cup or disk surrounded by a rim and
containing the fructification, or asci.

5. (Her.) The escutcheon or field on which are placed the bearings in
coats of arms. Cf. Lozenge. See Illust. of Escutcheon.

6. (Mining & Tunneling) A framework used to protect workmen in making
an adit under ground, and capable of being pushed along as excavation
progresses.

7. A spot resembling, or having the form of, a shield. "Bespotted as
with shields of red and black." Spenser.

8. A coin, the old French crown, or écu, having on one side the figure
of a shield. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Shield fern (Bot.), any fern of the genus Aspidium, in which the
fructifications are covered with shield-shaped indusia; -- called also
wood fern. See Illust. of Indusium.

Shield (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shielded; p. pr. & vb. n. Shielding.]
[AS. scidan, scyldan. See Shield, n.] 1. To cover with, or as with, a
shield; to cover from danger; to defend; to protect from assault or
injury.

    Shouts of applause ran ringing through the field, To see the son
    the vanquished father shield.


Dryden.

    A woman's shape doth shield thee.


Shak.

2. To ward off; to keep off or out.

    They brought with them their usual weeds, fit to shield the cold to
    which they had been inured.


Spenser.

3. To avert, as a misfortune; hence, as a supplicatory exclamation,
forbid! [Obs.]

    God shield that it should so befall.


Chaucer.

    God shield I should disturb devotion!


Shak.

Shield"-bear`er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, carries a shield.

2. (Zoöl.) Any small moth of the genus Aspidisca, whose larva makes a
shieldlike covering for itself out of bits of leaves.

Shield"drake` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A sheldrake.

Shield"less, a. Destitute of a shield, or of protection. --
Shield"less*ly, adv. -- Shield"less*ness, n.

Shield"tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of small burrowing snakes of
the family Uropeltidæ, native of Ceylon and Southern Asia. They have a
small mouth which can not be dilated.

Shiel"ing (?), n. A hut or shelter for shepherds of fishers. See
Sheeling. [Scot.]

Shift (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shifted; p. pr. & vb. n. Shifting.] [OE.
shiften, schiften, to divide, change, remove. AS. sciftan to divide;
akin to LG. & D. schiften to divide, distinguish, part Icel. skipta to
divide, to part, to shift, to change, Dan skifte, Sw. skifta, and
probably to Icel. skfa to cut into slices, as n., a slice, and to E.
shive, sheave, n., shiver, n.] 1. To divide; to distribute; to
apportion. [Obs.]

    To which God of his bounty would shift Crowns two of flowers well
    smelling.


Chaucer.

2. To change the place of; to move or remove from one place to another;
as, to shift a burden from one shoulder to another; to shift the blame.

    Hastily he schifte him[self].


Piers Plowman.

    Pare saffron between the two St. Mary's days, Or set or go shift it
    that knowest the ways.


Tusser.

3. To change the position of; to alter the bearings of; to turn; as, to
shift the helm or sails.

    Carrying the oar loose, [they] shift it hither and thither at
    pleasure.


Sir W. Raleigh.

4. To exchange for another of the same class; to remove and to put some
similar thing in its place; to change; as, to shift the clothes; to
shift the scenes.

    I would advise you to shift a shirt.


Shak.

5. To change the clothing of; -- used reflexively. [Obs.]

    As it were to ride day and night; and . . . not to have patience to
    shift me.


Shak.

6. To put off or out of the way by some expedient. "I shifted him
away." Shak.

To shift off, to delay; to defer; to put off; to lay aside. -- To shift
the scene, to change the locality or the surroundings, as in a play or
a story.

    Shift the scene for half an hour; Time and place are in thy power.


Swift.

Shift, v. i. 1. To divide; to distribute. [Obs.]

    Some this, some that, as that him liketh shift.


Chaucer.

2. To make a change or changes; to change position; to move; to veer;
to substitute one thing for another; -- used in the various senses of
the transitive verb.

    The sixth age shifts Into the lean and slippered pantaloon.


Shak.

    Here the Baillie shifted and fidgeted about in his seat.


Sir W. Scott.

3. To resort to expedients for accomplishing a purpose; to contrive; to
manage.

    Men in distress will look to themselves, and leave their companions
    to shift as well as they can.


L'Estrange.

4. To practice indirect or evasive methods.

    All those schoolmen, though they were exceeding witty, yet better
    teach all their followers to shift, than to resolve by their
    distinctions.


Sir W. Raleigh.

5. (Naut.) To slip to one side of a ship, so as to destroy the
equilibrum; -- said of ballast or cargo; as, the cargo shifted.

Shift (?), n. [Cf. Icel skipti. See Shift, v. t.] 1. The act of
shifting. Specifically: (a) The act of putting one thing in the place
of another, or of changing the place of a thing; change; substitution.

    My going to Oxford was not merely for shift of air.


Sir H. Wotton.

(b) A turning from one thing to another; hence, an expedient tried in
difficulty; often, an evasion; a trick; a fraud. "Reduced to pitiable
shifts." Macaulay.

    I 'll find a thousand shifts to get away.


Shak.

    Little souls on little shifts rely.


Dryden.

2. Something frequently shifted; especially, a woman's under-garment; a
chemise.

3. The change of one set of workmen for another; hence, a spell, or
turn, of work; also, a set of workmen who work in turn with other sets;
as, a night shift.

4. In building, the extent, or arrangement, of the overlapping of
plank, brick, stones, etc., that are placed in courses so as to break
joints.

5. (Mining) A breaking off and dislocation of a seam; a fault.

6. (Mus.) A change of the position of the hand on the finger board, in
playing the violin.

To make shift, to contrive or manage in an exigency. "I shall make
shift to go without him." Shak.

    [They] made a shift to keep their own in Ireland.


Milton.

Shift"a*ble (?), a. Admitting of being shifted.

Shift"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, shifts; one who plays
tricks or practices artifice; a cozener.

    'T was such a shifter that, if truth were known, Death was half
    glad when he had got him down.


Milton.

2. (Naut.) An assistant to the ship's cook in washing, steeping, and
shifting the salt provisions.

3. (Mach.) (a) An arrangement for shifting a belt sidewise from one
pulley to another. (b) (Knitting Mach.) A wire for changing a loop from
one needle to another, as in narrowing, etc.

Shift"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being shifty.

    Diplomatic shiftiness and political versatility.


J. A. Syminds.

Shift"ing, a. 1. Changing in place, position, or direction; varying;
variable; fickle; as, shifting winds; shifting opinions or principles.

2. Adapted or used for shifting anything.

Shifting backstays (Naut.), temporary stays that have to be let go
whenever the vessel tacks or jibes. -- Shifting ballast, ballast which
may be moved from one side of a vessel to another as safety requires.
-- Shifting center. See Metacenter. -- Shifting locomotive. See
Switching engine, under Switch.

Shift"ing*ly, adv. In a shifting manner.

Shift"less, a. Destitute of expedients, or not using successful
expedients; characterized by failure, especially by failure to provide
for one's own support, through negligence or incapacity; hence, lazy;
improvident; thriftless; as, a shiftless fellow; shiftless management.
-- Shift"less*ly, adv. -- Shift"less*ness, n.

Shift"y (?), a. Full of, or ready with, shifts; fertile in expedients
or contrivance. Wright.

    Shifty and thrifty as old Greek or modern Scot, there were few
    things he could not invent, and perhaps nothing he could not
    endure.


C. Kingsley.

{ Shi"ite (?), Shi"ah (?) }, n. [Ar. sh'aa follower of the sect of Ali,
fr. sh'at, sh'ah, a multitude following one another in pursuit of the
same object, the sect of Ali, fr. sh'a to follow.] A member of that
branch of the Mohammedans to which the Persians belong. They reject the
first three caliphs, and consider Ali as being the first and only
rightful successor of Mohammed. They do not acknowledge the Sunna, or
body of traditions respecting Mohammed, as any part of the law, and on
these accounts are treated as heretics by the Sunnites, or orthodox
Mohammedans.

{ Shi*ka"ree, ||Shi*ka"ri } (?) n. [Hind.] A sportsman; esp., a native
hunter. [India]

Shilf (?), n. [CF. G. shilf sedge.] Straw. [Obs.]

Shill (?), v. t. To shell. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Shill, v. t. [Cf. Sheal.] To put under cover; to sheal. [Prov.ng.]
Brockett.

{ Shil*la"lah, Shil*le"lah } (?), n. An oaken sapling or cudgel; any
cudgel; -- so called from Shillelagh, a place in Ireland of that name
famous for its oaks. [Irish] [Written also shillaly, and shillely.]

Shil"ling (?), n. [OE. shilling, schilling, AS. scilling; akin to D.
schelling, OS. & OHG. scilling, G. schilling, Sw. & Dan. skilling,
Icel. skillingr, Goth. skilliggs, and perh. to OHG. scellan to sound,
G. schallen.] 1. A silver coin, and money of account, of Great Britain
and its dependencies, equal to twelve pence, or the twentieth part of a
pound, equivalent to about twenty-four cents of the United States
currency.

2. In the United States, a denomination of money, differing in value in
different States. It is not now legally recognized.

Many of the States while colonies had issued bills of credit which had
depreciated in different degrees in the different colonies. Thus, in
New England currency (used also in Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee,
Indiana, Illinois, Missouri, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida), after
the adoption of the decimal system, the pound in paper money was worth
only $3.333, and the shilling 16&?; cts., or 6s. to $1; in New York
currency (also in North Carolina, Ohio, and Michigan), the pound was
worth $2.50, and the shilling 12½ cts., or 8s. to $1; in Pennsylvania
currency (also in New Jersey, Delaware, and Maryland), the pound was
worth $2.70, and the shilling 13½ cts., or 7s. 6d. to $1; and in
Georgia currency (also in South Carolina), the pound was worth
$4.29&?;, and the shilling 21&?; cts., or 4s 8d. to $1. In many parts
of the country . . . the reckoning by shillings and pence is not yet
entirely abandoned. Am. Cyc.

<! p. 1329 !>

3. The Spanish real, of the value of one eight of a dollar, or 12&?;
cets; -- formerly so called in New York and some other States. See Note
under 2.

York shilling. Same as Shilling, 3.

{ Shill"-I-shall`-I (?), Shil"ly-shal`ly, } adv. [A reduplication of
shall I.] In an irresolute, undecided, or hesitating manner.

    I am somewhat dainty in making a resolution, because when I make
    it, I keep it; I don't stand shill-I-shall-I then; if I say 't,
    I'll do 't.


Congreve.

Shil"ly-shal`ly, v. i. To hesitate; to act in an irresolute manner;
hence, to occupy one's self with trifles.

Shil"ly-shal`ly, n. Irresolution; hesitation; also, occupation with
trifles.

    She lost not one of her forty-five minutes in picking and choosing,
    -- no shilly-shally in Kate.


De Quincey.

Shi"loh (sh\'b6l), n. [Heb. shlh, literally, quiet, rest, fr. shlh to
rest.] (Script.) A word used by Jacob on his deathbed, and interpreted
variously, as "the Messiah," or as the city "Shiloh," or as "Rest."

Shi"ly (?), adv. See Shyly.

Shim (?), n. 1. A kind of shallow plow used in tillage to break the
ground, and clear it of weeds.

2. (Mach.) A thin piece of metal placed between two parts to make a
fit.

Shim"mer (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shimmered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shimmering.] [OE. schimeren, AS. scimerian; akin to scmian, scman, to
glitter, D. schemeren, G. schimmern, Dan. skimre, Sw. skimra, AS. scma
a light, brightness, Icel. skma, Goth. skeima a torch, a lantern, and
E. shine. &radic;157. See Shine, v. i.] To shine with a tremulous or
intermittent light; to shine faintly; to gleam; to glisten; to glimmer.

    The shimmering glimpses of a stream.


Tennyson.

Shim"mer, n. A faint, tremulous light; a gleaming; a glimmer.

    TWo silver lamps, fed with perfumed oil, diffused . . . a trembling
    twilight-seeming shimmer through the quiet apartment.


Sir W. Scott.

Shim"mer*ing, n. A gleam or glimmering. "A little shimmering of a
light." Chaucer.

Shim"my (?), n. A chemise. [Colloq.]

Shin (?), n. [OE. shine, schine, AS. scina; akin to D. scheen, OHG.
scina, G. schiene, schienbein, Dan. skinnebeen, Sw. skenben. Cf.
Chine.] 1. The front part of the leg below the knee; the front edge of
the shin bone; the lower part of the leg; the shank. "On his shin."
Chaucer.

2. (Railbroad) A fish plate for rails. Knight.

Shin bone (Anat.), the tibia. -- Shin leaf (Bot.), a perennial
ericaceous herb (Pyrola elliptica) with a cluster of radical leaves and
a raceme of greenish white flowers.

Shin, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shinned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shinning.] 1. To
climb a mast, tree, rope, or the like, by embracing it alternately with
the arms and legs, without help of steps, spurs, or the like; -- used
with up; as, to shin up a mast. [Slang]

2. To run about borrowing money hastily and temporarily, as for the
payment of one's notes at the bank. [Slang, U.S.] Bartlett.

Shin, v. t. To climb (a pole, etc.) by shinning up. [Slang]

Shin"dle (?), n. [See 2d Shingle.] A shingle; also, a slate for
roofing. [Obs.] Holland.

Shin"dle, v. t. To cover or roof with shindles. [Obs.]

Shin"dy (?), n.; pl. Shindies (#). [Etymol. uncertain; cf. Shinney,
Shinty.] 1. An uproar or disturbance; a spree; a row; a riot. [Slang]
Thackeray.

2. Hockey; shinney. Bartlett.

3. A fancy or liking. [Local, U. S.] Bartlett.

Shine (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shone (&?; or &?;; 277) (archaic Shined
(&?;)); p. pr. & vb. n. Shining.] [OE. shinen, schinen, AS. scnan; akin
to D. schijnen, OFries. skna, OS. & OHG. scnan, G. scheinen, Icel.
skna, Sw. skina, Dan. skinne, Goth. skeinan, and perh. to Gr. &?;&?;&?;
shadow. &radic;157. Cf. Sheer pure, and Shimmer.] 1. To emit rays of
light; to give light; to beam with steady radiance; to exhibit
brightness or splendor; as, the sun shines by day; the moon shines by
night.

    Hyperion's quickening fire doth shine.


Shak.

    God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined
    in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
    God in the face of Jesus Cghrist.


2 Cor. iv. 6.

    Let thine eyes shine forth in their full luster.


Denham.

2. To be bright by reflection of light; to gleam; to be glossy; as, to
shine like polished silver.

3. To be effulgent in splendor or beauty. "So proud she shined in her
princely state." Spenser.

    Once brightest shined this child of heat and air.


Pope.

4. To be eminent, conspicuous, or distinguished; to exhibit brilliant
intellectual powers; as, to shine in courts; to shine in conversation.

    Few are qualified to shine in company; but it in most men's power
    to be agreeable.


Swift.

To make, or cause, the face to shine upon, to be propitious to; to be
gracious to. Num. vi. 25.

Shine, v. t. 1. To cause to shine, as a light. [Obs.]

    He [God] doth not rain wealth, nor shine honor and virtues, upon
    men equally.


Bacon.

2. To make bright; to cause to shine by reflected light; as, in
hunting, to shine the eyes of a deer at night by throwing a light on
them. [U. S.] Bartlett.

Shine, n. 1. The quality or state of shining; brightness; luster,
gloss; polish; sheen.

    Now sits not girt with taper's holy shine.


Milton.

    Fair opening to some court's propitious shine.


Pope.

    The distant shine of the celestial city.


Hawthorne.

2. Sunshine; fair weather.

    Be it fair or foul, or rain or shine.


Dryden.

3. A liking for a person; a fancy. [Slang, U.S.]

4. Caper; antic; row. [Slang]

To cut up shines, to play pranks. [Slang, U.S.]

Shine (?), a. [AS. scn. See Shine, v. i.] Shining; sheen. [Obs.]
Spenser.

Shin"er (?), n. That which shines. Specifically: (a) A luminary. (b) A
bright piece of money. [Slang]

    Has she the shiners, d' ye think?


Foote.

(c) (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of small freshwater American
cyprinoid fishes, belonging to Notropis, or Minnilus, and allied
genera; as the redfin (Notropis megalops), and the golden shiner
(Notemigonus chrysoleucus) of the Eastern United States; also loosely
applied to various other silvery fishes, as the dollar fish, or
horsefish, menhaden, moonfish, sailor's choice, and the sparada. (d)
(Zoöl.) The common Lepisma, or furniture bug.

Blunt-nosed shiner (Zoöl.), the silver moonfish.

Shi"ness (?), n. See Shyness.

Shin"gle (?), n. [Prob. from Norw. singl, singling, coarse gravel,
small round stones.] (Geol.) Round, water-worn, and loose gravel and
pebbles, or a collection of roundish stones, such as are common on the
seashore and elsewhere.

Shin"gle, n. [OE. shingle, shindle, fr. L. scindula, scandula; cf.
scindere to cleave, to split, E. shed, v.t., Gr. &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;,
shingle, &?;&?;&?; to slit.] 1. A piece of wood sawed or rived thin and
small, with one end thinner than the other, -- used in covering
buildings, especially roofs, the thick ends of one row overlapping the
thin ends of the row below.

    I reached St. Asaph, . . . where there is a very poor cathedral
    church covered with shingles or tiles.


Ray.

2. A sign for an office or a shop; as, to hang out one's shingle.
[Jocose, U. S.]

Shingle oak (Bot.), a kind of oak (Quercus imbricaria) used in the
Western States for making shingles.

Shin"gle, v. t. [imp. &. p. p. Shingled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shingling
(?).] 1. To cover with shingles; as, to shingle a roof.

    They shingle their houses with it.


Evelyn.

2. To cut, as hair, so that the ends are evenly exposed all over the
head, as shingles on a roof.

Shin"gle, v. t. To subject to the process of shindling, as a mass of
iron from the pudding furnace.

Shin"gler (?), n. 1. One who shingles.

2. A machine for shingling puddled iron.

Shin"gles (?), n. [OF. cengle a girth, F. sangle, fr. L. cingulum a
girdle, fr. cingere to gird. Cf. Cincture, Cingle, Surcingle.] (Med.) A
kind of herpes (Herpes zoster) which spreads half way around the body
like a girdle, and is usually attended with violent neuralgic pain.

Shin"gling (?), n. 1. The act of covering with shingles; shingles,
collectively; a covering made of shingles.

2. (Metal) The process of expelling scoriæ and other impurities by
hammering and squeezing, in the production of wrought iron.

Shingling hammer, a ponderous hammer moved by machinery, used in
shingling puddled iron. -- Shingling mill, a mill or forge where
puddled iron is shingled.

Shin"gly (?), a. Abounding with shingle, or gravel.

Shin"hop`ple (?), n. The hobblebush.

Shin"ing (?), a. 1. Emitting light, esp. in a continuous manner;
radiant; as, shining lamps; also, bright by the reflection of light;
as, shining armor. "Fish . . . with their fins and shining scales."
Milton.

2. Splendid; illustrious; brilliant; distinguished; conspicious; as, a
shining example of charity.

3. Having the surface smooth and polished; -- said of leaves, the
surfaces of shells, etc.

Syn. -- Glistening; bright; radiant; resplendent; effulgent; lustrous;
brilliant; glittering; splendid; illustrious. -- Shining, Brilliant,
Sparking. Shining describes the steady emission of a strong light, or
the steady reflection of light from a clear or polished surface.
Brilliant denotes a shining of great brightness, but with gleams or
flashes. Sparkling implies a fitful, intense shining from radiant
points or sparks, by which the eye is dazzled. The same distinctions
obtain when these epithets are figuratively applied. A man of shining
talents is made conspicious by possessing them; if they flash upon the
mind with a peculiarly striking effect, we call them brilliant; if his
brilliancy is marked by great vivacity and occasional intensity, he is
sparkling.

    True paradise . . . inclosed with shining rock.


Milton.

    Some in a brilliant buckle bind her waist, Some round her neck a
    circling light display.


Gay.

    His sparkling blade about his head he blest.


Spenser.

Shin"ing, n. Emission or reflection of light.

Shin"ing*ness, n. Brightness. J. Spence.

Shin"ney (?), n. [CF. Shindy.] The game of hockey; -- so called because
of the liability of the players to receive blows on the shin.
Halliwell.

Shin"plas`ter (?), n. Formerly, a jocose term for a bank note greatly
depreciated in value; also, for paper money of a denomination less than
a dollar. [U. S.]

{ Shin"to (?), Shin"ti*ism (?), } n. [Chin. shin god + tao way,
doctrine.] One of the two great systems of religious belief in Japan.
Its essence is ancestor worship, and sacrifice to dead heroes. [Written
also Sintu, and Sintuism.]

Shin"to*ist (?), n. An adherent of Shintoism.

Shin"ty (?), n. [Cf. Gael. sinteag a skip, a bound.] A Scotch game
resembling hockey; also, the club used in the game. Jamieson.

Shin"y (?), a. [Compar. Shinier (?); superl. Shiniest.] Bright;
luminous; clear; unclouded.

    Like distant thunder on a shiny day.


Dryden.

-ship (?). [OE. -schipe, AS. -scipe; akin to OFries. -skipe, OLG.
-skepi, D. -schap, OHG. - scaf, G. -schaft. Cf. Shape, n., and
Landscape.] A suffix denoting state, office, dignity, profession, or
art; as in lordship, friendship, chancellorship, stewardship,
horsemanship.

Ship (?), n. [AS. scipe.] Pay; reward. [Obs.]

    In withholding or abridging of the ship or the hire or the wages of
    servants.


Chaucer.

Ship, n. [OE. ship, schip, AS. scip; akin to OFries. skip, OS. scip, D.
schip, G. schiff, OHG. scif, Dan. skib, Sw. skeep, Icel. & Goth. skip;
of unknown origin. Cf. Equip, Skiff, Skipper.] 1. Any large seagoing
vessel.

    Like a stately ship . . . With all her bravery on, and tackle trim,
    Sails filled, and streamers waving.


Milton.

    Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State!


Longfellow.

2. Specifically, a vessel furnished with a bowsprit and three masts (a
mainmast, a foremast, and a mizzenmast), each of which is composed of a
lower mast, a topmast, and a topgallant mast, and square-rigged on all
masts. See Illustation in Appendix.

l Port or Larboard Side; s Starboard Side; 1 Roundhouse or Deck House;
2 Tiller; 3 Grating; 4 Wheel; 5 Wheel Chains; 6 Binnacle; 7 Mizzenmast;
8 Skylight; 9 Capstan; 10 Mainmast; 11 Pumps; 12 Galley or Caboose; 13
Main Hatchway; 14 Windlass; 15 Foremast; 16 Fore Hatchway; 17 Bitts; 18
Bowsprit; 19 Head Rail; 20 Boomkins; 21 Catheads on Port Bow and
Starboard Bow; 22 Fore Chains; 23 Main Chains; 24 Mizzen Chains; 25
Stern.

1 Fore Royal Stay; 2 Flying Jib Stay; 3 Fore Topgallant Stay;4 Jib
Stay; 5 Fore Topmast Stays; 6 Fore Tacks; 8 Flying Martingale; 9
Martingale Stay, shackled to Dolphin Striker; 10 Jib Guys; 11 Jumper
Guys; 12 Back Ropes; 13 Robstays; 14 Flying Jib Boom; 15 Flying Jib
Footropes; 16 Jib Boom; 17 Jib Foottropes; 18 Bowsprit; 19 Fore Truck;
20 Fore Royal Mast; 21 Fore Royal Lift; 22 Fore Royal Yard; 23 Fore
Royal Backstays; 24 Fore Royal Braces; 25 Fore Topgallant Mast and
Rigging; 26 Fore Topgallant Lift; 27 Fore Topgallant Yard; 28 Fore
Topgallant Backstays; 29 Fore Topgallant Braces; 30 Fore Topmast and
Rigging; 31 Fore Topsail Lift; 32 Fore Topsail Yard; 33 Fore Topsail
Footropes; 34 Fore Topsail Braces; 35 Fore Yard; 36 Fore Brace; 37 Fore
Lift; 38 Fore Gaff; 39 Fore Trysail Vangs; 40 Fore Topmast
Studding-sail Boom; 41 Foremast and Rigging; 42 Fore Topmast Backstays;
43 Fore Sheets; 44 Main Truck and Pennant; 45 Main Royal Mast and
Backstay; 46 Main Royal Stay; 47 Main Royal Lift; 48 Main Royal Yard;
49 Main Royal Braces; 50 Main Topgallant Mast and Rigging; 51 Main
Topgallant Lift; 52 Main Topgallant Backstays; 53 Main Topgallant Yard;
54 Main Topgallant Stay; 55 Main Topgallant Braces; 56 Main Topmast and
Rigging; 57 Topsail Lift; 58 Topsail Yard; 59 Topsail Footropes; 60
Topsail Braces; 61 Topmast Stays; 62 Main Topgallant Studding-sail
Boom; 63 Main Topmast Backstay; 64 Main Yard; 65 Main Footropes; 66
Mainmast and Rigging; 67 Main Lift; 68 Main Braces; 69 Main Tacks; 70
Main Sheets; 71 Main Trysail Gaff; 72 Main Trysail Vangs; 73 Main
Stays; 74 Mizzen Truck; 75 Mizzen Royal Mast and Rigging; 76 Mizzen
Royal Stay; 77 Mizzen Royal Lift; 78 Mizzen Royal Yard; 79 Mizzen Royal
Braces; 80 Mizzen Topgallant Mast and Rigging; 81 Mizzen Topgallant
Lift; 82 Mizzen Topgallant Backstays; 83 Mizzen Topgallant Braces; 84
Mizzen Topgallant Yard; 85 Mizzen Topgallant Stay; 86 Mizzen Topmast
and Rigging; 87 Mizzen Topmast Stay; 88 Mizzen Topsail Lift; 89 Mizzen
Topmast Backstays; 90 Mizzen Topsail Braces; 91 Mizzen Topsail Yard; 92
Mizzen Topsail Footropes; 93 Crossjack Yard; 94 Crossjack Footropes; 95
Crossjack Lift; 96 Crossjack Braces; 97 Mizzenmast and Rigging; 98
Mizzen Stay; 99 Spanker Gaff; 100 Peak Halyards; 101 Spanker Vangs; 102
Spanker Boom; 103 Spanker Boom Topping Lift; 104 Jacob's Ladder, or
Stern Ladder; 105 Spanker Sheet; 106 Cutwater; 107 Starboard Bow; 108
Starboard Beam; 109 Water Line; 110 Starboard Quarter; 111 Rudder.

<! p. 1330 !>

3. A dish or utensil (originally fashioned like the hull of a ship)
used to hold incense. [Obs.] Tyndale.

Armed ship, a private ship taken into the service of the government in
time of war, and armed and equipped like a ship of war. [Eng.] Brande &
C. -- General ship. See under General. -- Ship biscuit, hard biscuit
prepared for use on shipboard; -- called also ship bread. See Hardtack.
-- Ship boy, a boy who serves in a ship. "Seal up the ship boy's eyes."
Shak. -- Ship breaker, one who breaks up vessels when unfit for further
use. -- Ship broker, a mercantile agent employed in buying and selling
ships, procuring cargoes, etc., and generally in transacting the
business of a ship or ships when in port. -- Ship canal, a canal
suitable for the passage of seagoing vessels. -- Ship carpenter, a
carpenter who works at shipbuilding; a shipwright. -- Ship chandler,
one who deals in cordage, canvas, and other, furniture of vessels. --
Ship chandlery, the commodities in which a ship chandler deals; also,
the business of a ship chandler. -- Ship fever (Med.), a form of typhus
fever; -- called also putrid, jail, or hospital fever. -- Ship joiner,
a joiner who works upon ships. -- Ship letter, a letter conveyed by a
ship not a mail packet. -- Ship money (Eng. Hist.), an imposition
formerly charged on the ports, towns, cities, boroughs, and counties,
of England, for providing and furnishing certain ships for the king's
service. The attempt made by Charles I. to revive and enforce this tax
was resisted by John Hampden, and was one of the causes which led to
the death of Charles. It was finally abolished. -- Ship of the line.
See under Line. -- Ship pendulum, a pendulum hung amidships to show the
extent of the rolling and pitching of a vessel. -- Ship railway. (a) An
inclined railway with a cradelike car, by means of which a ship may be
drawn out of water, as for repairs. (b) A railway arranged for the
transportation of vessels overland between two water courses or
harbors. -- Ship's company, the crew of a ship or other vessel. --
Ship's days, the days allowed a vessel for loading or unloading. --
Ship's husband. See under Husband. -- Ship's papers (Mar. Law), papers
with which a vessel is required by law to be provided, and the
production of which may be required on certain occasions. Among these
papers are the register, passport or sea letter, charter party, bills
of lading, invoice, log book, muster roll, bill of health, etc.
Bouvier. Kent. -- To make ship, to embark in a ship or other vessel.

Ship (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shipped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shipping.]
1. To put on board of a ship, or vessel of any kind, for
transportation; to send by water.

    The timber was . . . shipped in the bay of Attalia, from whence it
    was by sea transported to Pelusium.


Knolles.

2. By extension, in commercial usage, to commit to any conveyance for
transportation to a distance; as, to ship freight by railroad.

3. Hence, to send away; to get rid of. [Colloq.]

4. To engage or secure for service on board of a ship; as, to ship
seamen.

5. To receive on board ship; as, to ship a sea.

6. To put in its place; as, to ship the tiller or rudder.

Ship, v. i. 1. To engage to serve on board of a vessel; as, to ship on
a man-of- war.

2. To embark on a ship. Wyclif (Acts xxviii. 11)

Ship"board` (?), n. [Ship + board. See Board, n., 8] A ship's side;
hence, by extension, a ship; -- found chiefly in adverbial phrases; as,
on shipboard; a shipboard.

Ship"build`er (?), n. A person whose occupation is to construct ships
and other vessels; a naval architect; a shipwright.

Ship"build`ing, n. Naval architecturel the art of constructing ships
and other vessels.

Ship"ful (?), n.; pl. Shipfuls (&?;). As much or as many as a ship will
hold; enough to fill a ship.

Ship"hold`er (?), n. A shipowner.

Ship"less, a. Destitute of ships. Gray.

Ship"let (?), n. A little ship. [R.] Holinshed.

Ship"load` (?), n. The load, or cargo, of a ship.

Ship"man (?), n.; pl. Shipmen (&?;). A seaman, or sailor. [Obs. or
Poetic] Chaucer. R. Browning.

    About midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some
    country.


Acts xxvii. 27.

Shipman's card, the mariner's compass. [Obs.] Shak.

Ship"mas`ter (?), n. The captain, master, or commander of a ship. Jonah
i. 6.

Ship"mate` (?), n. One who serves on board of the same ship with
another; a fellow sailor.

Ship"ment (?), n. 1. The act or process of shipping; as, he was engaged
in the shipment of coal for London; an active shipment of wheat from
the West.

2. That which is shipped.

    The question is, whether the share of M. in the shipment is
    exempted from condemnation by reason of his neutral domicle.


Story.

Ship"own`er (?), n. Owner of a ship or ships.

Ship"pen (?), n. [AS. scypen. Cf. Shop, Shepen.] A stable; a cowhouse.
[Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Ship"per (?), n. [See Ship, n., and cf. Skipper.] One who sends goods
from one place to another not in the same city or town, esp. one who
sends goods by water.

Ship"ping (?), a. 1. Relating to ships, their ownership, transfer, or
employment; as, shiping concerns.

2. Relating to, or concerned in, the forwarding of goods; as, a
shipping clerk.

Ship"ping, n. 1. The act of one who, or of that which, ships; as, the
shipping of flour to Liverpool.

2. The collective body of ships in one place, or belonging to one port,
country, etc.; vessels, generally; tonnage.

3. Navigation. "God send 'em good shipping." Shak.

Shipping articles, articles of agreement between the captain of a
vessel and the seamen on board, in respect to the amount of wages,
length of time for which they are shipping, etc. Bouvier. -- To take
shipping, to embark; to take ship. [Obs.] John vi. 24. Shak.

Ship"pon (?), n. A cowhouse; a shippen. [Prov. Eng.]

    Bessy would either do fieldwork, or attend to the cows, the
    shippon, or churn, or make cheese.


Dickens.

Ship"-rigged` (?), a. (Naut.) Rigged like a ship, that is, having three
masts, each with square sails.

Ship"shape` (?), a. Arranged in a manner befitting a ship; hence, trim;
tidy; orderly.

    Even then she expressed her scorn for the lubbery executioner's
    mode of tying a knot, and did it herself in a shipshape orthodox
    manner.


De Quincey.

    Keep everything shipshape, for I must go


Tennyson.

Ship"shape` (?), adv. In a shipshape or seamanlike manner.

Ship"worm` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any long, slender, worm-shaped bivalve
mollusk of Teredo and allied genera. The shipworms burrow in wood, and
are destructive to wooden ships, piles of wharves, etc. See Teredo.

Ship"wreck` (?), n. 1. The breaking in pieces, or shattering, of a ship
or other vessel by being cast ashore or driven against rocks, shoals,
etc., by the violence of the winds and waves.

2. A ship wrecked or destroyed upon the water, or the parts of such a
ship; wreckage. Dryden.

3. Fig.: Destruction; ruin; irretrievable loss.

    Holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away
    concerning faith have made shipwreck.


1 Tim. 1. 19.

    It was upon an Indian bill that the late ministry had made
    shipwreck.


J. Morley.

Ship"wreck`, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shipwrecked (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shipwrecking.] 1. To destroy, as a ship at sea, by running ashore or on
rocks or sandbanks, or by the force of wind and waves in a tempest.

    Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break.


Shak.

2. To cause to experience shipwreck, as sailors or passengers. Hence,
to cause to suffer some disaster or loss; to destroy or ruin, as if by
shipwreck; to wreck; as, to shipwreck a business. Addison.

Ship"wright` (?), n. One whose occupation is to construct ships; a
builder of ships or other vessels.

Ship"yard` (?), n. A yard, place, or inclosure where ships are built or
repaired.

Shi*raz" (?), n. A kind of Persian wine; -- so called from the place
whence it is brought.

Shire (?), n. [AS. scre, scr, a division, province, county. Cf.
Sheriff.] 1. A portion of Great Britain originally under the
supervision of an earl; a territorial division, usually identical with
a county, but sometimes limited to a smaller district; as, Wiltshire,
Yorkshire, Richmondshire, Hallamshire.

    An indefinite number of these hundreds make up a county or shire.


Blackstone.

2. A division of a State, embracing several contiguous townships; a
county. [U. S.]

Shire is commonly added to the specific designation of a county as a
part of its name; as, Yorkshire instead of York shire, or the shire of
York; Berkshire instead of Berks shire. Such expressions as the county
of Yorkshire, which in a strict sense are tautological, are used in
England. In the United States the composite word is sometimes the only
name of a county; as, Berkshire county, as it is called in
Massachusetts, instead of Berks county, as in Pensylvania.

    The Tyne, Tees, Humber, Wash, Yare, Stour, and Thames separate the
    counties of Northumberland, Durham, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, etc.


Encyc. Brit.

Knight of the shire. See under Knight. -- Shire clerk, an officer of a
county court; also, an under sheriff. [Eng.] -- Shire mote (Old. Eng.
Law), the county court; sheriff's turn, or court. [Obs.] Cowell.
Blackstone. -- Shire reeve (Old Eng. Law), the reeve, or bailiff, of a
shire; a sheriff. Burrill. -- Shire town, the capital town of a county;
a county town. -- Shire wick, a county; a shire. [Obs.] Holland.

Shirk (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shirked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shirking.]
[Probably the same word as shark. See Shark, v. t.] 1. To procure by
petty fraud and trickery; to obtain by mean solicitation.

    You that never heard the call of any vocation, . . . that shirk
    living from others, but time from Yourselves.


Bp. Rainbow.

2. To avoid; to escape; to neglect; -- implying unfaithfulness or
fraud; as, to shirk duty.

    The usual makeshift by which they try to shirk difficulties.


Hare.

Shirk, v. i. 1. To live by shifts and fraud; to shark.

2. To evade an obligation; to avoid the performance of duty, as by
running away.

    One of the cities shirked from the league.


Byron.

Shirk, n. One who lives by shifts and tricks; one who avoids the
performance of duty or labor.

Shirk"er (?), n. One who shirks. Macaulay.

Shirk"y (?), a. Disposed to shirk. [Colloq.]

Shirl (?), a. Shrill. [Prov. Eng.]  Halliwell.

Shirl, n. (Min.) See Schorl.

Shir"ley (?), n. (Zoöl.) The bullfinch.

Shirr (?), n. (Sewing) A series of close parallel runnings which are
drawn up so as to make the material between them set full by
gatherings; -- called also shirring, and gauging.

Shirred (?), a. 1. (Sewing) Made or gathered into a shirr; as, a
shirred bonnet.

2. (Cookery) Broken into an earthen dish and baked over the fire; --
said of eggs.

Shirt (?), n. [OE. schirte, sherte, schurte; akin to Icel. skyrta, Dan.
skiorte, Sw. skjorta, Dan. skiört a petticoat, D. schort a petticoat,
an argon, G. schurz, schürze, an argon; all probably from the root of
E. short, as being originally a short garment. See Short, and cf.
Skirt.] A loose under-garment for the upper part of the body, made of
cotton, linen, or other material; -- formerly used of the under-garment
of either sex, now commonly restricted to that worn by men and boys.

    Several persons in December had nothing over their shoulders but
    their shirts.


Addison.

    She had her shirts and girdles of hair.


Bp. Fisher.

Shirt, v. t. & i. [imp. & p. p. Shirted; p. pr. & vb. n. Shirting.] To
cover or clothe with a shirt, or as with a shirt. Dryden.

Shirt"ing, n. Cloth, specifically cotton cloth, suitable for making
shirts.

Shirt"less, a. Not having or wearing a shirt. Pope.

-- Shirt"less*ness, n.

{ Shist (?), Shis*tose" (?) }. See Shist, Schistose.

{ Shit"tah (?), Shit"tah tree` }, n. [Heb. shitth, pl. shittm.] A tree
that furnished the precious wood of which the ark, tables, altars,
boards, etc., of the Jewish tabernacle were made; -- now believed to
have been the wood of the Acacia Seyal, which is hard, fine grained,
and yellowish brown in color.

{ Shit"tim (?), Shit"tim wood` }, n. The wood of the shittah tree.

Shit"tle (?), n. [See Shuttle.] A shuttle. [Obs.] Chapman.

Shit"tle, a. Wavering; unsettled; inconstant. [Obs.] Holland.

Shit"tle*cock` (?), n. A shuttlecock. [Obs.]

Shit"tle*ness, n. Instability; inconstancy. [Obs.]

    The vain shittlenesse of an unconstant head.


Baret.

Shive (?), n. [See Sheave, n.] 1. A slice; as, a shive of bread. [Obs.
or Prov. Eng.] Shak.

2. A thin piece or fragment; specifically, one of the scales or pieces
of the woody part of flax removed by the operation of breaking.

3. A thin, flat cork used for stopping a wide- mouthed bottle; also, a
thin wooden bung for casks.

Shiv"er (?), n. [OE. schivere, fr. shive; cf. G. schifer a splinter,
slate, OHG. scivere a splinter, Dan. & Sw. skifer a slate. See Shive,
and cf. Skever.] 1. One of the small pieces, or splinters, into which a
brittle thing is broken by sudden violence; -- generally used in the
plural. "All to shivers dashed." Milton.

2. A thin slice; a shive. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.] "A shiver of their own
loaf." Fuller.

    Of your soft bread, not but a shiver.


Chaucer.

3. (Geol.) A variety of blue slate.

4. (Naut.) A sheave or small wheel in a pulley.

5. A small wedge, as for fastening the bolt of a window shutter.

6. A spindle. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Shiv"er, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shivered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shivering.]
[OE. schiveren, scheveren; cf. OD. scheveren. See Shiver a fragment.]
To break into many small pieces, or splinters; to shatter; to dash to
pieces by a blow; as, to shiver a glass goblet.

    All the ground With shivered armor strown.


Milton.

Shiv"er, v. i. To separate suddenly into many small pieces or parts; to
be shattered.

    There shiver shafts upon shields thick.


Chaucer

    The natural world, should gravity once cease, . . . would instantly
    shiver into millions of atoms.


Woodward.

Shiv"er, v. i. [OE. chiveren, cheveren; of uncertain origin. This word
seems to have been confused with shiver to shatter.] To tremble; to
vibrate; to quiver; to shake, as from cold or fear.

    Prometheus is laid On icy Caucasus to shiver.


Swift.

    The man that shivered on the brink of sin, Thus steeled and
    hardened, ventures boldly in.


Creech.

Shiv"er, v. t. (Naut.) To cause to shake or tremble, as a sail, by
steering close to the wind.

Shiv"er, n. The act of shivering or trembling.

Shiv"er*ing*ly, adv. In a shivering manner.

Shiv"er-spar` (?), n. [Cf. G. schiefer-spath.] (Min.) A variety of
calcite, so called from its slaty structure; -- called also slate spar.

Shiv"er*y (?), a. 1. Tremulous; shivering. Mallet.

2. Easily broken; brittle; shattery.

Shoad (?), n. [Cf. G. schutt rubbish.] (Mining) A train of vein
material mixed with rubbish; fragments of ore which have become
separated by the action of water or the weather, and serve to direct in
the discovery of mines. [Written also shode.]

Shoad"ing, n. (Mining) The tracing of veins of metal by shoads.
[Written also shoding.] Pryce.

Shoal (?), n. [AS. scolu, sceolu, a company, multitude, crowd, akin to
OS. skola; probably originally, a division, and akin to Icel. skilja to
part, divide. See Skill, and cf. School. of fishes.] A great multitude
assembled; a crowd; a throng; -- said especially of fish; as, a shoal
of bass. "Great shoals of people." Bacon.

    Beneath, a shoal of silver fishes glides.


Waller.

Shoal, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shoaled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shoaling.] To
assemble in a multitude; to throng; as, the fishes shoaled about the
place. Chapman.

Shoal, a. [Cf. Shallow; or cf. G. scholle a clod, glebe, OHG. scollo,
scolla, prob. akin to E. shoal a multitude.] Having little depth;
shallow; as, shoal water.

Shoal, n. 1. A place where the water of a sea, lake, river, pond, etc.,
is shallow; a shallow.

    The depth of your pond should be six feet; and on the sides some
    shoals for the fish to lay their span.


Mortimer.

    Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory, And sounded all the
    depths and shoals of honor.


Shak.

2. A sandbank or bar which makes the water shoal.

    The god himself with ready trident stands, And opes the deep, and
    spreads the moving sands, Then heaves them off the shoals.


Dryden.

Shoal, v. i. To become shallow; as, the color of the water shows where
it shoals.

Shoal, v. t. To cause to become more shallow; to come to a more shallow
part of; as, a ship shoals her water by advancing into that which is
less deep. Marryat.

Shoal"i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being shoaly; little depth
of water; shallowness.

Shoal"ing, a. Becoming shallow gradually. "A shoaling estuary." Lyell.

Shoal"y (?), a. Full of shoals, or shallow places.

    The tossing vessel sailed on shoaly ground.


Dryden.

Shoar (shr), n. A prop. See 3d Shore.

Shoat (sht), n. A young hog. Same as Shote.

<! p. 1331 !>

Shock (?), n. [OE. schokke; cf. OD schocke, G. schock a heap, quantity,
threescore, MHG. schoc, Sw. skok, and also G. hocke a heap of hay,
Lith. kugis.] 1. A pile or assemblage of sheaves of grain, as wheat,
rye, or the like, set up in a field, the sheaves varying in number from
twelve to sixteen; a stook.

    And cause it on shocks to be by and by set.


Tusser.

    Behind the master walks, builds up the shocks.


Thomson.

2. [G. schock.] (Com.) A lot consisting of sixty pieces; -- a term
applied in some Baltic ports to loose goods.

Shock, v. t. To collect, or make up, into a shock or shocks; to stook;
as, to shock rye.

Shock, v. i. To be occupied with making shocks.

    Reap well, scatter not, gather clean that is shorn, Bind fast,
    shock apace.


Tusser.

Shock, n. [Cf. D. schok a bounce, jolt, or leap, OHG. scoc a swing,
MHG. schoc, Icel. skykkjun tremuously, F. choc a shock, collision, a
dashing or striking against, Sp. choque, It. ciocco a log. &radic;161.
Cf. Shock to shake.] 1. A quivering or shaking which is the effect of a
blow, collision, or violent impulse; a blow, impact, or collision; a
concussion; a sudden violent impulse or onset.

    These strong, unshaken mounds resist the shocks Of tides and seas
    tempestuous.


Blackmore.

    He stood the shock of a whole host of foes.


Addison.

2. A sudden agitation of the mind or feelings; a sensation of pleasure
or pain caused by something unexpected or overpowering; also, a sudden
agitating or overpowering event. "A shock of pleasure." Talfourd.

3. (Med.) A sudden depression of the vital forces of the entire body,
or of a port of it, marking some profound impression produced upon the
nervous system, as by severe injury, overpowering emotion, or the like.

4. (Elec.) The sudden convulsion or contraction of the muscles, with
the feeling of a concussion, caused by the discharge, through the
animal system, of electricity from a charged body.

Syn. -- Concussion, Shock. Both words signify a sudden violent shaking
caused by impact or colision; but concussion is restricted in use to
matter, while shock is used also of mental states.

Shock, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shocked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shocking.] [OE.
schokken; cf. D. schokken, F. choquer, Sp. chocar. &radic;161. Cf.
Chuck to strike, Jog, Shake, Shock a striking, Shog, n. & v.] 1. To
give a shock to; to cause to shake or waver; hence, to strike against
suddenly; to encounter with violence.

    Come the three corners of the world in arms, And we shall shock
    them.


Shak.

    I shall never forget the force with which he shocked De Vipont.


Sir W. Scott.

2. To strike with surprise, terror, horror, or disgust; to cause to
recoil; as, his violence shocked his associates.

    Advise him not to shock a father's will.


Dryden.

Shock, v. i. To meet with a shock; to meet in violent encounter. "They
saw the moment approach when the two parties would shock together." De
Quincey.

Shock, n. [Cf. Shag.] 1. (Zoöl.) A dog with long hair or shag; --
called also shockdog.

2. A thick mass of bushy hair; as, a head covered with a shock of sandy
hair.

Shock, a. Bushy; shaggy; as, a shock hair.

    His red shock peruke . . . was laid aside.


Sir W. Scott.

Shock"dog` (?), n. (Zoöl.) See 7th Shock, 1.

Shock"-head` (?), a. Shock- headed. Tennyson.

Shock"-head`ed, a. Having a thick and bushy head of hair.

Shock"ing, a. Causing to shake or tremble, as by a blow; especially,
causing to recoil with horror or disgust; extremely offensive or
disgusting.

    The grossest and most shocking villainies.


Secker.

-- Shock"ing*ly, adv. -- Shock"ing*ness, n.

Shod (?), imp. & p. p. f Shoe.

Shod"dy (?), n. [Perhaps fr. Shed, v. t.; as meaning originally, waste
stuff shedor thrown off.] 1. A fibrous material obtained by "deviling,"
or tearing into fibers, refuse woolen goods, old stockings, rags,
druggets, etc. See Mungo.

2. A fabric of inferior quality made of, or containing a large amount
of, shoddy.

The great quantity of shoddy goods furnished as army supplies in the
late Civil War in the United States gave wide currency to the word, and
it came to be applied to persons who pretend to a higher position in
society than that to which their breeding or worth entitles them.

Shod"dy, a. Made wholly or in part of shoddy; containing shoddy; as,
shoddy cloth; shoddy blankets; hence, colloquially, not genuine; sham;
pretentious; as, shoddy aristocracy.

    Shoddy inventions designed to bolster up a factitious pride.


Compton Reade.

Shod"dy*ism (?), n. The quality or state of being shoddy. [Colloq.] See
the Note under Shoddy, n.

Shode (?), n. [AS. scde, fr. sceádan. See Shed, v. t.] 1. The parting
of the hair on the head. [Obs.]

    Full straight and even lay his jolly shode.


Chaucer.

2. The top of the head; the head. [Obs.] Chaucer.

{ Shode, Shod"ing }. See Shoad, Shoading.

Sho"der (?), n. A package of gold beater's skins in which gold is
subjected to the second process of beating.

Shoe (?), n.; pl. Shoes (#), formerly Shoon (#), now provincial. [OE.
sho, scho, AS. sc&?;h, sceóh; akin to OFries. sk&?;, OS. sk&?;h, D.
schoe, schoen, G. schuh, OHG. scuoh, Icel. sk&?;r, Dan. & Sw. sko,
Goth. sk&?;hs; of unknown origin.] 1. A covering for the human foot,
usually made of leather, having a thick and somewhat stiff sole and a
lighter top. It differs from a boot on not extending so far up the leg.

    Your hose should be ungartered, . . . yourshoe untied.


Shak.

    Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon.


Shak.

2. Anything resembling a shoe in form, position, or use. Specifically:
(a) A plate or rim of iron nailed to the hoof of an animal to defend it
from injury. (b) A band of iron or steel, or a ship of wood, fastened
to the bottom of the runner of a sleigh, or any vehicle which slides on
the snow. (c) A drag, or sliding piece of wood or iron, placed under
the wheel of a loaded vehicle, to retard its motion in going down a
hill. (d) The part of a railroad car brake which presses upon the wheel
to retard its motion. (e) (Arch.) A trough-shaped or spout-shaped
member, put at the bottom of the water leader coming from the eaves
gutter, so as to throw the water off from the building. (f) (Milling.)
The trough or spout for conveying the grain from the hopper to the eye
of the millstone. (g) An inclined trough in an ore-crushing mill. (h)
An iron socket or plate to take the thrust of a strut or rafter. (i) An
iron socket to protect the point of a wooden pile. (j) (Mach.) A plate,
or notched piece, interposed between a moving part and the stationary
part on which it bears, to take the wear and afford means of
adjustment; -- called also slipper, and gib.

Shoe is often used adjectively, or in composition; as, shoe buckle, or
shoe-buckle; shoe latchet, or shoe-latchet; shoe leathet, or
shoe-leather; shoe string, shoe-string, or shoestring.

Shoe of an anchor. (Naut.) (a) A small block of wood, convex on the
back, with a hole to receive the point of the anchor fluke, -- used to
prevent the anchor from tearing the planks of the vessel when raised or
lowered. (b) A broad, triangular piece of plank placed upon the fluke
to give it a better hold in soft ground. -- Shoe block (Naut.), a block
with two sheaves, one above the other, and at right angles to each
other. -- Shoe bolt, a bolt with a flaring head, for fastening shoes on
sleigh runners. -- Shoe pac, a kind of moccasin. See Pac. -- Shoe
stone, a sharpening stone used by shoemakers and other workers in
leather.

Shoe (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shod; p. pr. & vb. n. Shoeing.] [AS.
sc&?;ian, sce&?;ian. See Shoe, n.] 1. To furnish with a shoe or shoes;
to put a shoe or shoes on; as, to shoe a horse, a sled, an anchor.

2. To protect or ornament with something which serves the purpose of a
shoe; to tip.

    The sharp and small end of the billiard stick, which is shod with
    brass or silver.


Evelyn.

Shoe"bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A large African wading bird (Balæniceps rex)
allied to the storks and herons, and remarkable for its enormous broad
swollen bill. It inhabits the valley of the White Nile. See Illust.
(l.) of Beak.

Shoe"black` (?), n. One who polishes shoes.

{ Shoe"horn`, Shoe"ing-horn` } (?), n. 1. A curved piece of polished
horn, wood, or metal used to facilitate the entrance of the foot into a
shoe.

2. Figuratively: (a) Anything by which a transaction is facilitated; a
medium; -- by way of contempt. Spectator. (b) Anything which draws on
or allures; an inducement. [Low] Beau. & Fl.

Shoe"less, a. Destitute of shoes. Addison.

Shoe"mak`er (?), n. 1. One whose occupation it is to make shoes and
boots.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The threadfish. (b) The runner, 12.

Shoe"mak`ing, n. The business of a shoemaker.

Sho"er (?), n. One who fits shoes to the feet; one who furnishes or
puts on shoes; as, a shoer of horses.

Shog (?), n. [See Shock a striking.] A shock; a jog; a violent
concussion or impulse. [R. or Scot.]

Shog, v. t. To shake; to shock. [R. or Scot.]

Shog, v. i. [Cf. W. ysgogi to wag, to stir. Cf. Jog.] To jog; to move
on. [R. or Scot.] Beau. & Fl.

Shog"gle (?), v. t. [See Shog, Joggle.] To joggle. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.
& Scot.] Pegge.

Sho"gun (?), n. [Chin. tsiang kiÜn commander in chief.] A title
originally conferred by the Mikado on the military governor of the
eastern provinces of Japan. By gradual usurpation of power the Shoguns
(known to foreigners as Tycoons) became finally the virtual rulers of
Japan. The title was abolished in 1867. [Written variously, Shiogun,
Shiogoon, etc.]

Sho*gun"ate (?), n. The office or dignity of a Shogun. [Written also
Siogoonate.]

Sho"la (?), n. (Bot.) See Sola.

Shole (?), n. A plank fixed beneath an object, as beneath the rudder of
a vessel, to protect it from injury; a plank on the ground under the
end of a shore or the like.

Shole, n. See Shoal. [Obs.]

Shonde (?), n. [AS. sceond. Cf. Shend.] Harm; disgrace; shame. [Obs.]
Chaucer.

Shone (?), imp. & p. p. of Shine.

Shoo (?), interj. [Cf. G. scheuchen to scare, drive away.] Begone;
away; -- an expression used in frightening away animals, especially
fowls.

Sho"oi, n. (Zoöl.) The Richardson's skua (Stercorarius parasiticus);-
so called from its cry. [Prov. Eng.]

Shook (?), imp. & obs. or poet. p. p. of Shake.

Shook, n. [Cf. Shock a bundle of sheaves.] (Com.) (a) A set of staves
and headings sufficient in number for one hogshead, cask, barrel, or
the like, trimmed, and bound together in compact form. (b) A set of
boards for a sugar box. (c) The parts of a piece of house furniture, as
a bedstead, packed together.

Shook, v. t. To pack, as staves, in a shook.

Shoon (?), n., pl. of Shoe. [Archaic] Chaucer.

    They shook the snow from hats and shoon.


Emerson.

Shoop (?), obs. imp. of Shape. Shaped. Chaucer.

Shoot (?), n. [F. chute. See Chute. Confused with shoot to let fly.] An
inclined plane, either artificial or natural, down which timber, coal,
etc., are caused to slide; also, a narrow passage, either natural or
artificial, in a stream, where the water rushes rapidly; esp., a
channel, having a swift current, connecting the ends of a bend in the
stream, so as to shorten the course. [Written also chute, and shute.]
[U. S.]

To take a shoot, to pass through a shoot instead of the main channel;
to take the most direct course. [U.S.]

Shoot (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shot (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shooting. The
old participle Shotten is obsolete. See Shotten.] [OE. shotien,
schotien, AS. scotian, v. i., sceótan; akin to D. schieten, G.
schie&?;en, OHG. sciozan, Icel. skj&?;ta, Sw. skjuta, Dan. skyde; cf.
Skr. skund to jump. &radic;159. Cf. Scot a contribution, Scout to
reject, Scud, Scuttle, v. i., Shot, Sheet, Shut, Shuttle, Skittish,
Skittles.] 1. To let fly, or cause to be driven, with force, as an
arrow or a bullet; -- followed by a word denoting the missile, as an
object.

    If you please To shoot an arrow that self way.


Shak.

2. To discharge, causing a missile to be driven forth; -- followed by a
word denoting the weapon or instrument, as an object; -- often with
off; as, to shoot a gun.

    The two ends od a bow, shot off, fly from one another.


Boyle.

3. To strike with anything shot; to hit with a missile; often, to kill
or wound with a firearm; -- followed by a word denoting the person or
thing hit, as an object.

    When Roger shot the hawk hovering over his master's dove house.


A. Tucker.

4. To send out or forth, especially with a rapid or sudden motion; to
cast with the hand; to hurl; to discharge; to emit.

    An honest weaver as ever shot shuttle.


Beau. & Fl.

    A pit into which the dead carts had nightly shot corpses by scores.


Macaulay.

5. To push or thrust forward; to project; to protrude; -- often with
out; as, a plant shoots out a bud.

    They shoot out the lip, they shake the head.


Ps. xxii. 7.

    Beware the secret snake that shoots a sting.


Dryden.

6. (Carp.) To plane straight; to fit by planing.

    Two pieces of wood that are shot, that is, planed or else pared
    with a paring chisel.


Moxon.

7. To pass rapidly through, over, or under; as, to shoot a rapid or a
bridge; to shoot a sand bar.

    She . . . shoots the Stygian sound.


Dryden.

8. To variegate as if by sprinkling or intermingling; to color in spots
or patches.

    The tangled water courses slept, Shot over with purple, and green,
    and yellow.


Tennyson.

To be shot of, to be discharged, cleared, or rid of. [Colloq.] "Are you
not glad to be shot of him?" Sir W. Scott.

Shoot, v. i. 1. To cause an engine or weapon to discharge a missile; --
said of a person or an agent; as, they shot at a target; he shoots
better than he rides.

    The archers have . . . shot at him.


Gen. xlix. 23.

2. To discharge a missile; -- said of an engine or instrument; as, the
gun shoots well.

3. To be shot or propelled forcibly; -- said of a missile; to be
emitted or driven; to move or extend swiftly, as if propelled; as, a
shooting star.

    There shot a streaming lamp along the sky.


Dryden.

4. To penetrate, as a missile; to dart with a piercing sensation; as,
shooting pains.

    Thy words shoot through my heart.


Addison.

5. To feel a quick, darting pain; to throb in pain.

    These preachers make His head to shoot and ache.


Herbert.

6. To germinate; to bud; to sprout.

    Onions, as they hang, will shoot forth.


Bacon.

    But the wild olive shoots, and shades the ungrateful plain.


Dryden.

7. To grow; to advance; as, to shoot up rapidly.

    Well shot in years he seemed.


Spenser.

    Delightful task! to rear the tender thought, To teach the young
    idea how to shoot.


Thomson.

8. To change form suddenly; especially, to solidify.

    If the menstruum be overcharged, metals will shoot into crystals.


Bacon.

9. To protrude; to jut; to project; to extend; as, the land shoots into
a promontory.

    There shot up against the dark sky, tall, gaunt, straggling houses.


Dickens.

10. (Naut.) To move ahead by force of momentum, as a sailing vessel
when the helm is put hard alee.

To shoot ahead, to pass or move quickly forward; to outstrip others.

Shoot, n. 1. The act of shooting; the discharge of a missile; a shot;
as, the shoot of a shuttle.

    The Turkish bow giveth a very forcible shoot.


Bacon.

    One underneath his horse to get a shoot doth stalk.


Drayton.

2. A young branch or growth.

    Superfluous branches and shoots of this second spring.


Evelyn.

3. A rush of water; a rapid.

4. (Min.) A vein of ore running in the same general direction as the
lode. Knight.

5. (Weaving) A weft thread shot through the shed by the shuttle; a
pick.

6. [Perh. a different word.] A shoat; a young hog.

Shoot"er (?), n. 1. One who shoots, as an archer or a gunner.

2. That which shoots. Specifically: (a) A firearm; as, a five-shooter.
[Colloq. U.S.] (b) A shooting star. [R.]

Shoot"ing, n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, shoots; as, the
shooting of an archery club; the shooting of rays of light.

2. A wounding or killing with a firearm; specifically (Sporting), the
killing of game; as, a week of shooting.

3. A sensation of darting pain; as, a shooting in one's head.

Shoot"ing, a. Of or pertaining to shooting; for shooting; darting.

Shooting board (Joinery), a fixture used in planing or shooting the
edge of a board, by means of which the plane is guided and the board
held true. -- Shooting box, a small house in the country for use in the
shooting season. Prof. Wilson. -- Shooting gallery, a range, usually
covered, with targets for practice with firearms. -- Shooting iron, a
firearm. [Slang, U.S.] -- Shooting star. (a) (Astron.) A starlike,
luminous meteor, that, appearing suddenly, darts quickly across some
portion of the sky, and then as suddenly disappears, leaving sometimes,
for a few seconds, a luminous train, -- called also falling star.
Shooting stars are small cosmical bodies which encounter the earth in
its annual revolution, and which become visible by coming with
planetary velocity into the upper regions of the atmosphere. At certain
periods, as on the 13th of November and 10th of August, they appear for
a few hours in great numbers, apparently diverging from some point in
the heavens, such displays being known as meteoric showers, or star
showers. These bodies, before encountering the earth, were moving in
orbits closely allied to the orbits of comets. See Leonids, Perseids.
(b) (Bot.) The American cowslip (Dodecatheon Meadia). See under
Cowslip. -- Shooting stick (Print.), a tapering piece of wood or iron,
used by printers to drive up the quoins in the chase. Hansard.

<! p. 1332 !>

Shoot"y (?), a. Sprouting or coming up freely and regularly. [Prev.
Eng.] Grose.

Shop (?), obs. imp. of Shape. Shaped. Chaucer.

Shop, n. [OE. shoppe, schoppe, AS. sceoppa a treasury, a storehouse,
stall, booth; akin to scypen a shed, LG. schup a shed, G. schoppen,
schuppen, a shed, a coachhouse, OHG. scopf.] 1. A building or an
apartment in which goods, wares, drugs, etc., are sold by retail.

    From shop to shop Wandering, and littering with unfolded silks The
    polished counter.


Cowper.

2. A building in which mechanics or artisans work; as, a shoe shop; a
car shop.

    A tailor called me in his shop.


Shak.

Shop is often used adjectively or in composition; as, shop rent, or
shop-rent; shop thief, or shop-thief; shop window, or shop-window, etc.

To smell of the shop, to indicate too distinctively one's occupation or
profession. -- To talk shop, to make one's business the topic of social
conversation; also, to use the phrases peculiar to one's employment.
[Colloq.]

Syn. -- Store; warehouse. See Store.

Shop, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shopped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shopping.] To
visit shops for the purpose of purchasing goods.

    He was engaged with his mother and some ladies to go shopping.


Byron.

Shop"board` (?), n. A bench or board on which work is performed; a
workbench. South.

Shop"book` (?), n. A book in which a tradesman keeps his accounts.
Locke.

Shop"boy` (?), n. A boy employed in a shop.

Sho"pen (?), obs. p. p. of Shape. Chaucer.

Shop"girl` (?), n. A girl employed in a shop.

Shop"keep`er (?), n. A trader who sells goods in a shop, or by retail;
-- in distinction from one who sells by wholesale. Addison.

Shop"lift`er (?), n. [Shop + lift. See Lift to steal.] One who steals
anything in a shop, or takes goods privately from a shop; one who,
under pretense of buying goods, takes occasion to steal.

Shop"lift`ing, n. Larceny committed in a shop; the stealing of anything
from a shop.

Shop"like`, a. Suiting a shop; vulgar. B. Jonson.

Shop"maid` (?), n. A shopgirl.

Shop"man (?), n.; pl. Shopmen (&?;). 1. A shopkeeper; a retailer.
Dryden.

2. One who serves in a shop; a salesman.

3. One who works in a shop or a factory.

Shop"per (?), n. One who shops.

Shop"pish (?), a. Having the appearance or qualities of a shopkeeper,
or shopman.

Shop"py (?), a. 1. Abounding with shops. [Colloq.]

2. Of or pertaining to shops, or one's own shop or business; as, shoppy
talk. [Colloq.] Mrs. Gaskell.

Shop"shift` (?), n. The trick of a shopkeeper; deception. [Obs.] B.
Jonson.

Shop"walk`er (?), n. One who walks about in a shop as an overseer and
director. Cf. Floorwalker.

Shop"wom`an (?), n.; pl. Shopwomen (&?;). A woman employed in a shop.

Shop"worn` (?), a. Somewhat worn or damaged by having been kept for a
time in a shop.

Shor"age (?), n. Duty paid for goods brought on shore. Grabb.

Shore (?), imp. of Shear. Chaucer.

Shore, n. A sewer. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Shore, n. [OE. schore; akin to LG. schore, D. schoor, OD. schoore,
Icel. skor&?;a, and perhaps to E. shear, as being a piece cut off.] A
prop, as a timber, placed as a brace or support against the side of a
building or other structure; a prop placed beneath anything, as a beam,
to prevent it from sinking or sagging. [Written also shoar.]

Shore, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shored (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shoring.] [OE.
schoren. See Shore a prop.] To support by a shore or shores; to prop;
-- usually with up; as, to shore up a building.

Shore, n. [OE. schore, AS. score, probably fr. scieran, and so meaning
properly, that which is shorn off, edge; akin to OD. schoore, schoor.
See Shear, v. t.] The coast or land adjacent to a large body of water,
as an ocean, lake, or large river.

    Michael Cassio, Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello, Is come
    shore.


Shak.

    The fruitful shore of muddy Nile.


Spenser.

In shore, near the shore. Marryat. -- On shore. See under On. -- Shore
birds (Zoöl.), a collective name for the various limicoline birds found
on the seashore. -- Shore crab (Zoöl.), any crab found on the beaches,
or between tides, especially any one of various species of grapsoid
crabs, as Heterograpsus nudus of California. -- Shore lark (Zoöl.), a
small American lark (Otocoris alpestris) found in winter, both on the
seacoast and on the Western plains. Its upper parts are varied with
dark brown and light brown. It has a yellow throat, yellow local
streaks, a black crescent on its breast, a black streak below each eye,
and two small black erectile ear tufts. Called also horned lark. --
Shore plover (Zoöl.), a large-billed Australian plover (Esacus
magnirostris). It lives on the seashore, and feeds on crustaceans, etc.
-- Shore teetan (Zoöl.), the rock pipit (Anthus obscurus). [Prov. Eng.]

Shore (?), v. t. To set on shore. [Obs.] Shak.

Shore"less, a. Having no shore or coast; of indefinite or unlimited
extent; as, a shoreless ocean. Young.

Shore"ling (?), n. See Shorling.

Shor"er (?), n. One who, or that which, shores or props; a prop; a
shore.

Shore"ward (?), adv. Toward the shore.

Shor"ing, n. 1. The act of supporting or strengthening with a prop or
shore.

2. A system of props; props, collectively.

Shorl (?), n., Shor*la"ceous (&?;), a. (Min.) See Schorl, Schorlaceous.

Shor"ling (?), n. 1. The skin of a sheen after the fleece is shorn off,
as distinct from the morling, or skin taken from the dead sheep; also,
a sheep of the first year's shearing. [Prov. Eng.]

2. A person who is shorn; a shaveling; hence, in contempt, a priest.
[Obs.] Halliwell.

Shorn (&?;), p. p. of Shear.

Short (?), a. [Compar. Shorter (?); superl. Shortest.] [OE. short,
schort, AS. scort, sceort; akin to OHG. scurz, Icel. skorta to be short
of, to lack, and perhaps to E. shear, v. t. Cf. Shirt.] 1. Not long;
having brief length or linear extension; as, a short distance; a short
piece of timber; a short flight.

    The bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it.


Isa. xxviii. 20.

2. Not extended in time; having very limited duration; not protracted;
as, short breath.

    The life so short, the craft so long to learn.


Chaucer.

    To short absense I could yield.


Milton.

3. Limited in quantity; inadequate; insufficient; scanty; as, a short
supply of provisions, or of water.

4. Insufficiently provided; inadequately supplied; scantily furnished;
lacking; not coming up to a resonable, or the ordinary, standard; --
usually with of; as, to be short of money.

    We shall be short in our provision.


Shak.

5. Deficient; defective; imperfect; not coming up, as to a measure or
standard; as, an account which is short of the trith.

6. Not distant in time; near at hand.

    Marinell was sore offended That his departure thence should be so
    short.


Spenser.

    He commanded those who were appointed to attend him to be ready by
    a short day.


Clarendon.

7. Limited in intellectual power or grasp; not comprehensive; narrow;
not tenacious, as memory.

    Their own short understandings reach No farther than the present.


Rowe.

8. Less important, efficaceous, or powerful; not equal or equivalent;
less (than); -- with of.

    Hardly anything short of an invasion could rouse them again to war.


Landor.

9. Abrupt; brief; pointed; petulant; as, he gave a short answer to the
question.

10. (Cookery) Breaking or crumbling readily in the mouth; crisp; as,
short pastry.

11. (Metal) Brittle.

Metals that are brittle when hot are called &?;ot- short; as, cast iron
may be hot-short, owing to the presence of sulphur. Those that are
brittle when cold are called cold-short; as, cast iron may be
cold-short, on account of the presence of phosphorus.

12. (Stock Exchange) Engaging or engaged to deliver what is not
possessed; as, short contracts; to be short of stock. See The shorts,
under Short, n., and To sell short, under Short, adv.

In mercantile transactions, a note or bill is sometimes made payable at
short sight, that is, in a little time after being presented to the
payer.

13. (Phon.) Not prolonged, or relatively less prolonged, in utterance;
-- opposed to long, and applied to vowels or to syllables. In English,
the long and short of the same letter are not, in most cases, the long
and short of the same sound; thus, the i in ill is the short sound, not
of i in isle, but of ee in eel, and the e in pet is the short sound of
a in pate, etc. See Quantity, and Guide to Pronunciation, §§22, 30.

Short is much used with participles to form numerous self-explaining
compounds; as, short-armed, short- billed, short-fingered,
short-haired, short- necked, short-sleeved, short-tailed, short-
winged, short-wooled, etc.

At short notice, in a brief time; promptly. -- Short rib (Anat.), one
of the false ribs. -- Short suit (Whist), any suit having only three
cards, or less than three. R. A. Proctor. -- To come short, To cut
short, To fall short, etc. See under Come, Cut, etc.

Short, n. 1. A summary account.

    The short and the long is, our play is preferred.


Shak.

2. pl. The part of milled grain sifted out which is next finer than the
bran.

    The first remove above bran is shorts.


Halliwell.

3. pl. Short, inferior hemp.

4. pl. Breeches; shortclothes. [Slang] Dickens.

5. (Phonetics) A short sound, syllable, or vowel.

    If we compare the nearest conventional shorts and longs in English,
    as in "bit" and "beat," "not" and "naught," we find that the short
    vowels are generally wide, the long narrow, besides being generally
    diphthongic as well. Hence, originally short vowels can be
    lengthened and yet kept quite distinct from the original longs.


H. Sweet.

In short, in few words; in brief; briefly. -- The long and the short,
the whole; a brief summing up. -- The shorts (Stock Exchange), those
who are unsupplied with stocks which they contracted to deliver.

Short (?), adv. In a short manner; briefly; limitedly; abruptly;
quickly; as, to stop short in one's course; to turn short.

    He was taken up very short, and adjudged corrigible for such
    presumptuous language.


Howell.

To sell short (Stock Exchange), to sell, for future delivery, what the
party selling does not own, but hopes to buy at a lower rate.

Short, v. t. [AS. sceortian.] To shorten. [Obs.]

Short, v. i. To fail; to decrease. [Obs.]

Short"age (?), n. Amount or extent of deficiency, as determined by some
requirement or standard; as, a shortage in money accounts.

Short"-breathed` (?), a. 1. Having short-breath, or quick respiration.

2. Having short life.

Short"cake` (?), n. An unsweetened breakfast cake shortened with butter
or lard, rolled thin, and baked.

Short" cir"cuit (?). (Elec.) A circuit formed or closed by a conductor
of relatively low resistance because shorter or of relatively great
conductivity.

Short"-cir`cuit, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Short-circuited; p. pr. & vb. n.
Short-circuiting.] (Elec.) To join, as the electrodes of a battery or
dynamo or any two points of a circuit, by a conductor of low
resistance.

Short"clothes` (?), n. Coverings for the legs of men or boys,
consisting of trousers which reach only to the knees, -- worn with long
stockings.

Short"com`ing (?), n. The act of falling, or coming short; as: (a) The
failure of a crop, or the like. (b) Neglect of, or failure in,
performance of duty.

Short"-dat`ed (?), a. Having little time to run from the date. "Thy
short-dated life." Sandys.

Short"en (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shortened &?;; p. pr. & vb. n.
Shortening.] [See Short, a.] 1. To make short or shorter in measure,
extent, or time; as, to shorten distance; to shorten a road; to shorten
days of calamity.

2. To reduce or diminish in amount, quantity, or extent; to lessen; to
abridge; to curtail; to contract; as, to shorten work, an allowance of
food, etc.

    Here, where the subject is so fruitful, I am shortened by my chain.


Dryden.

3. To make deficient (as to); to deprive; -- with of.

    Spoiled of his nose, and shortened of his ears.


Dryden.

4. To make short or friable, as pastry, with butter, lard, pot liquor,
or the like.

To shorten a rope (Naut.), to take in the slack of it. -- To shorten
sail (Naut.), to reduce sail by taking it in.

Short"en, v. i. To become short or shorter; as, the day shortens in
northern latitudes from June to December; a metallic rod shortens by
cold.

Short"en*er (?), n. One who, or that which, shortens.

Short"en*ing, n. 1. The act of making or becoming short or shorter.

2. (Cookery) That which renders pastry short or friable, as butter,
lard, etc.

Short"hand` (?), n. A compendious and rapid method or writing by
substituting characters, abbreviations, or symbols, for letters, words,
etc.; short writing; stenography. See Illust. under Phonography.

Short`-hand"ed, a. Short of, or lacking the regular number of, servants
or helpers.

Short"head` (?), n. A sucking whale less than one year old; -- so
called by sailors.

Short"horn` (?), a. One of a breed of large, heavy domestic cattle
having short horns. The breed was developed in England.

Short"-joint`ed (?), a. Having short intervals between the joints; --
said of a plant or an animal, especially of a horse whose pastern is
too short.

Short"-lived` (?), a. Not living or lasting long; being of short
continuance; as, a short-lived race of beings; short-lived pleasure;
short-lived passion.

Short"ly, adv. [AS. sceortlice.] 1. In a short or brief time or manner;
soon; quickly. Chaucer.

    I shall grow jealous of you shortly.


Shak.

    The armies came shortly in view of each other.


Clarendon.

2. In few words; briefly; abruptly; curtly; as, to express ideas more
shortly in verse than in prose.

Short"ness, n. The quality or state of being short; want of reach or
extension; brevity; deficiency; as, the shortness of a journey; the
shortness of the days in winter; the shortness of an essay; the
shortness of the memory; a shortness of provisions; shortness of
breath.

Short"sight`ed (?), a. 1. Not able to see far; nearsighted; myopic. See
Myopic, and Myopia.

2. Fig.: Not able to look far into futurity; unable to understand
things deep; of limited intellect.

3. Having little regard for the future; heedless.

-- Short"sight`ed*ly, adv. -- Short"sight`ed*ness, n.

    Cunning is a kind of shortsightedness.


Addison.

Short"-spo`ken (?), a. Speaking in a quick or short manner; hence,
gruff; curt. [Colloq.]

Short"stop` (?), n. (Baseball) The player stationed in the field
bewtween the second and third bases.

Short"-waist`ed (?), a. Having a short waist.

Short"-wind`ed (?), a. Affected with shortness of breath; having a
quick, difficult respiration, as dyspnoic and asthmatic persons. May.

Short"wing` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of small
wrenlike Asiatic birds having short wings and a short tail. They belong
to Brachypterix, Callene, and allied genera.

<! p. 1333 !>

Short"-wit`ed (?), a. Having little wit; not wise; having scanty
intellect or judgment.

Shor"y (?), a. Lying near the shore. [Obs.]

Sho*sho"nes (?), n. pl.; sing. Shoshone (&?;). (Ethnol.) A linguistic
family or stock of North American Indians, comprising many tribes,
which extends from Montana and Idaho into Mexico. In a restricted sense
the name is applied especially to the Snakes, the most northern of the
tribes.

Shot (?), imp. & p. p. of Shoot.

Shot, a. Woven in such a way as to produce an effect of variegation, of
changeable tints, or of being figured; as, shot silks. See Shoot, v.
t., 8.

Shot, n. [AS. scot, sceot, fr. sceótan to shoot; akin to D. sschot,
Icel. skot. &radic;159. See Scot a share, Shoot, v. t., and cf. Shot a
shooting.] A share or proportion; a reckoning; a scot.

    Here no shots are where all shares be.


Chapman.

    A man is never . . . welcome to a place till some certain shot be
    paid and the hostess say "Welcome."


Shak.

Shot, n.; pl. Shotor Shots (#). [OE. shot, schot, AS. gesceot a
missile; akin to D. schot a shot, shoot, G. schuss, geschoss a missile,
Icel. skot a throwing, a javelin, and E. shoot, v.t. &radic;159. See
Shoot, and cf. Shot a share.] 1. The act of shooting; discharge of a
firearm or other weapon which throws a missile.

    He caused twenty shot of his greatest cannon to be made at the
    king's army.


Clarendon.

2. A missile weapon, particularly a ball or bullet; specifically,
whatever is discharged as a projectile from firearms or cannon by the
force of an explosive.

Shot used in war is of various kinds, classified according to the
material of which it is composed, into lead, wrought-iron, and
cast-iron; according to form, into spherical and oblong; according to
structure and modes of operation, into solid, hollow, and case. See Bar
shot, Chain shot, etc., under Bar, Chain, etc.

3. Small globular masses of lead, of various sizes, -- used chiefly for
killing game; as, bird shot; buckshot.

4. The flight of a missile, or the distance which it is, or can be,
thrown; as, the vessel was distant more than a cannon shot.

5. A marksman; one who practices shooting; as, an exellent shot.

Shot belt, a belt having a pouch or compartment for carrying shot. --
Shot cartridge, a cartridge containing powder and small shot, forming a
charge for a shotgun. -- Shot garland (Naut.), a wooden frame to
contain shot, secured to the coamings and ledges round the hatchways of
a ship. -- Shot gauge, an instrument for measuring the diameter of
round shot. Totten. -- shot hole, a hole made by a shot or bullet
discharged. - - Shot locker (Naut.), a strongly framed compartment in
the hold of a vessel, for containing shot. -- Shot of a cable (Naut.),
the splicing of two or more cables together, or the whole length of the
cables thus united. -- Shot prop (Naut.), a wooden prop covered with
tarred hemp, to stop a hole made by the shot of an enemy in a ship's
side. -- Shot tower, a lofty tower for making shot, by dropping from
its summit melted lead in slender streams. The lead forms spherical
drops which cool in the descent, and are received in water or other
liquid. -- Shot window, a window projecting from the wall. Ritson,
quoted by Halliwell, explains it as a window that opens and shuts; and
Wodrow describes it as a window of shutters made of timber and a few
inches of glass above them.

Shot, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shotted; p. pr. & vb. n. Shotting.] To load
with shot, as a gun. Totten.

Shot"-clog` (?), n. A person tolerated only because he pays the shot,
or reckoning, for the rest of the company, otherwise a mere clog on
them. [Old Slang]

    Thou common shot-clog, gull of all companies.


Chapman.

Shote (?), n. [AS. sceóta a darting fish, a trout, fr. sceótan. See
Shoot, v. t.] 1. (Zoöl.) A fish resembling the trout. [Obs. or Prov.
Eng.] Garew.

2. [Perh. a different word.] A young hog; a shoat.

Shot"-free` (?), a. Not to be injured by shot; shot-proof. [Obs.]
Feltham.

Shot"-free`, a. Free from charge or expense; hence, unpunished;
scot-free. [Obs.] Shak.

Shot"gun` (?), n. A light, smooth- bored gun, often double-barreled,
especially designed for firing small shot at short range, and killing
small game.

Shot"-proof` (?), a. Impenetrable by shot.

Shots (?), n. pl. The refuse of cattle taken from a drove. [Prov. Eng.]
Halliwell.

Shot"ted (?), a. 1. Loaded with shot.

2. (Med.) Having a shot attached; as, a shotten suture.

Shot"ten (?), n. [Properly p. p. of shoot; AS. scoten, sceoten, p. p.
of sceótan.] 1. Having ejected the spawn; as, a shotten herring. Shak.

2. Shot out of its socket; dislocated, as a bone.

Shough (?), n. (Zoöl.) A shockdog.

Shough (?), interj. See Shoo. Beau. & Fl.

Should (?), imp. of Shall. [OE. sholde, shulde, scholde, schulde, AS.
scolde, sceolde. See Shall.] Used as an auxiliary verb, to express a
conditional or contingent act or state, or as a supposition of an
actual fact; also, to express moral obligation (see Shall); e. g.: they
should have come last week; if I should go; I should think you could
go. "You have done that you should be sorry for." Shak.

Syn. -- See Ought.

Shoul"der (?), n. [OE. shulder, shuldre, schutder, AS. sculdor; akin to
D. schoulder, G. schulter, OHG. scultarra, Dan. skulder, Sw. skuldra.]
1. (Anat.) The joint, or the region of the joint, by which the fore
limb is connected with the body or with the shoulder girdle; the
projection formed by the bones and muscles about that joint.

2. The flesh and muscles connected with the shoulder joint; the upper
part of the back; that part of the human frame on which it is most easy
to carry a heavy burden; -- often used in the plural.

    Then by main force pulled up, and on his shoulders bore The gates
    of Azza.


Milton.

    Adown her shoulders fell her length of hair.


Dryden.

3. Fig.: That which supports or sustains; support.

    In thy shoulder do I build my seat.


Shak.

4. That which resembles a human shoulder, as any protuberance or
projection from the body of a thing.

    The north western shoulder of the mountain.


Sir W. Scott.

5. The upper joint of the fore leg and adjacent parts of an animal,
dressed for market; as, a shoulder of mutton.

6. (Fort.) The angle of a bastion included between the face and flank.
See Illust. of Bastion.

7. An abrupt projection which forms an abutment on an object, or limits
motion, etc., as the projection around a tenon at the end of a piece of
timber, the part of the top of a type which projects beyond the base of
the raised character, etc.

Shoulder belt, a belt that passes across the shoulder. -- Shoulder
blade (Anat.), the flat bone of the shoulder, to which the humerus is
articulated; the scapula. -- Shoulder block (Naut.), a block with a
projection, or shoulder, near the upper end, so that it can rest
against a spar without jamming the rope. -- Shoulder clapper, one who
claps another on the shoulder, or who uses great familiarity. [Obs.]
Shak. -- Shoulder girdle. (Anat.) See Pectoral girdle, under Pectoral.
-- Shoulder knot, an ornamental knot of ribbon or lace worn on the
shoulder; a kind of epaulet or braided ornament worn as part of a
military uniform. -- Shoulder-of-mutton sail (Naut.), a triangular sail
carried on a boat's mast; -- so called from its shape. -- Shoulder
slip, dislocation of the shoulder, or of the humerous. Swift. --
Shoulder strap, a strap worn on or over the shoulder. Specifically
(Mil. & Naval), a narrow strap worn on the shoulder of a commissioned
officer, indicating, by a suitable device, the rank he holds in the
service. See Illust. in App.

Shoul"der (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shouldered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shouldering.] 1. To push or thrust with the shoulder; to push with
violence; to jostle.

    As they the earth would shoulder from her seat.


Spenser.

    Around her numberless the rabble flowed, Shouldering each other,
    crowding for a view.


Rowe.

2. To take upon the shoulder or shoulders; as, to shoulder a basket;
hence, to assume the burden or responsibility of; as, to shoulder
blame; to shoulder a debt.

    As if Hercules Or burly Atlas shouldered up their state.


Marston.

Right shoulder arms (Mil.), a position in the Manual of Arms which the
piece is placed on the right shoulder, with the lock plate up, and the
muzzle elevated and inclined to the left, and held as in the
illustration.

Shoul"dered (?), a. Having shoulders; -- used in composition; as, a
broad-shouldered man. "He was short-shouldered." Chaucer.

Shoul"der-shot`ten (?), a. Sprained in the shoulder, as a horse. Shak.

Shout (shout), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shouted; p. pr. & vb. n. Shouting.]
[OE. shouten, of unknown origin; perhaps akin to shoot; cf. Icel. skta,
skti, a taunt.] To utter a sudden and loud outcry, as in joy, triumph,
or exultation, or to attract attention, to animate soldiers, etc.

    Shouting of the men and women eke.


Chaucer.

    They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?


Shak.

To shout at, to utter shouts at; to deride or revile with shouts.

Shout, v. t. 1. To utter with a shout; to cry; -- sometimes with out;
as, to shout, or to shout out, a man's name.

2. To treat with shouts or clamor. Bp. Hall.

Shout, n. A loud burst of voice or voices; a vehement and sudden
outcry, especially of a multitudes expressing joy, triumph, exultation,
or animated courage.

    The Rhodians, seeing the enemy turn their backs, gave a great shout
    in derision.


Knolles.

Shout"er (?), n. One who shouts.

Shove (shv), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shoved (shvd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shoving.] [OE. shoven, AS. scofian, fr. scfan; akin to OFries. skva, D.
schuiven, G. schieben, OHG. scioban, Icel. skfa, skfa, Sw. skuffa, Dan.
skuffe, Goth. afskiuban to put away, cast away; cf. Skr. kshubh to
become agitated, to quake, Lith. skubrus quick, skubinti to hasten.
&radic;160. Cf. Sheaf a bundle of stalks, Scoop, Scuffle.] 1. To drive
along by the direct and continuous application of strength; to push;
especially, to push (a body) so as to make it move along the surface of
another body; as, to shove a boat on the water; to shove a table across
the floor.

2. To push along, aside, or away, in a careless or rude manner; to
jostle.

    And shove away the worthy bidden guest.


Milton.

    He used to shove and elbow his fellow servants.


Arbuthnot.

Shove, v. i. 1. To push or drive forward; to move onward by pushing or
jostling.

2. To move off or along by an act pushing, as with an oar a pole used
by one in a boat; sometimes with off.

    He grasped the oar, eceived his guests on board, and shoved from
    shore.


Garth.

Shove (?), n. The act of shoving; a forcible push.

    I rested . . . and then gave the boat another shove.


Swift.

Syn. -- See Thrust.

Shove, obs. p. p. of Shove. Chaucer.

{ Shove"board` (?), Shove"groat` (?) }, n. The same as Shovelboard.

Shov"el (?), n. [OE. shovele, schovele, AS. scoft, sceoft; akin to D.
schoffel, G. schaufel, OHG. sc&?;vala, Dan. skovl, Sw. skofvel,
skyffel, and to E. shove. &radic;160. See Shove, v. t.] An implement
consisting of a broad scoop, or more or less hollow blade, with a
handle, used for lifting and throwing earth, coal, grain, or other
loose substances.

Shovel hat, a broad-brimmed hat, turned up at the sides, and projecting
in front like a shovel, -- worn by some clergy of the English Church.
[Colloq.] -- Shovelspur (Zoöl.), a flat, horny process on the tarsus of
some toads, -- used in burrowing. -- Steam shovel, a machine with a
scoop or scoops, operated by a steam engine, for excavating earth, as
in making railway cuttings.

Shov"el, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shoveled (?) or Shovelled; p. pr. & vb. n.
Shoveling or Shovelling.] 1. To take up and throw with a shovel; as, to
shovel earth into a heap, or into a cart, or out of a pit.

2. To gather up as with a shovel.

Shov"el*ard (?), n. (Zoöl.) Shoveler. [Prov. Eng.]

Shov"el*bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The shoveler.

Shov"el*board` (?), n. 1. A board on which a game is played, by pushing
or driving pieces of metal or money to reach certain marks; also, the
game itself. Called also shuffleboard, shoveboard, shovegroat,
shovelpenny.

2. A game played on board ship in which the aim is to shove or drive
with a cue wooden disks into divisions chalked on the deck; -- called
also shuffleboard.

Shov"el*er (?), n. [Also shoveller.] 1. One who, or that which,
shovels.

2. (Zoöl.) A river duck (Spatula clypeata), native of Europe and
America. It has a large bill, broadest towards the tip. The male is
handsomely variegated with green, blue, brown, black, and white on the
body; the head and neck are dark green. Called also broadbill,
spoonbill, shovelbill, and maiden duck. The Australian shoveler, or
shovel-nosed duck (S. rhynchotis), is a similar species.

Shov"el*ful (?), n.; pl. Shovelfuls (&?;). As much as a shovel will
hold; enough to fill a shovel.

Shov"el*head` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A shark (Sphryna tiburio) allied to the
hammerhead, and native of the warmer parts of the Atlantic and Pacific
oceans; -- called also bonnet shark.

Shov"el*nose` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The common sand shark. See under
Snad. (b) A small California shark (Heptranchias maculatus), which is
taken for its oil. (c) A Pacific Ocean shark (Hexanchus corinus). (d) A
ganoid fish of the Sturgeon family (Scaphirhynchus platyrhynchus) of
the Mississippi and Ohio rivers; -- called also white sturgeon.

Shov"el-nosed` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a broad, flat nose; as, the
shovel- nosed duck, or shoveler.

Shov"en (?), obs. p. p. of Shove. Chaucer.

Show (?), v. t. [imp. Showed (?); p. p. Shown (?) or Showed; p. pr. &
vb. n. Showing. It is sometimes written shew, shewed, shewn, shewing.]
[OE. schowen, shewen, schewen, shawen, AS. sceáwian, to look, see,
view; akin to OS. scaw&?;n, OFries. skawia, D. schouwen, OHG.
scouw&?;n, G. schauen, Dan. skue, Sw. sk&?;da, Icel. sko&?;a, Goth.
usskawjan to waken, skuggwa a mirror, Icel. skuggy shade, shadow, L.
cavere to be on one's guard, Gr. &?;&?;&?; to mark, perceive, hear,
Skr. kavi wise. Cf. Caution, Scavenger, Sheen.] 1. To exhibit or
present to view; to place in sight; to display; -- the thing exhibited
being the object, and often with an indirect object denoting the person
or thing seeing or beholding; as, to show a house; show your colors;
shopkeepers show customers goods (show goods to customers).

    Go thy way, shew thyself to the priest.


Matt. viii. 4.

    Nor want we skill or art from whence to raise Magnificence; and
    what can heaven show more?


Milton.

2. To exhibit to the mental view; to tell; to disclose; to reveal; to
make known; as, to show one's designs.

    Shew them the way wherein they must walk.


Ex. xviii. 20.

    If it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee,
    and send thee away.


1 Sam. xx. 13.

3. Specifically, to make known the way to (a person); hence, to direct;
to guide; to asher; to conduct; as, to show a person into a parlor; to
show one to the door.

4. To make apparent or clear, as by evidence, testimony, or reasoning;
to prove; to explain; also, to manifest; to evince; as, to show the
truth of a statement; to show the causes of an event.

    I 'll show my duty by my timely care.


Dryden.

5. To bestow; to confer; to afford; as, to show favor.

    Shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me.


Ex. xx. 6.

To show forth, to manifest; to publish; to proclaim. -- To show his
paces, to exhibit the gait, speed, or the like; -- said especially of a
horse. -- To show off, to exhibit ostentatiously. -- To show up, to
expose. [Colloq.]

Show, v. i. [Written also shew.] 1. To exhibit or manifest one's self
or itself; to appear; to look; to be in appearance; to seem.

    Just such she shows before a rising storm.


Dryden.

    All round a hedge upshoots, and shows At distance like a little
    wood.


Tennyson.

<! p. 1334 !>

2. To have a certain appearance, as well or ill, fit or unfit; to
become or suit; to appear.

    My lord of York, it better showed with you.


Shak.

To show off, to make a show; to display one's self.

Show (?), n. [Formerly written also shew.] 1. The act of showing, or
bringing to view; exposure to sight; exhibition.

2. That which os shown, or brought to view; that which is arranged to
be seen; a spectacle; an exhibition; as, a traveling show; a cattle
show.

    As for triumphs, masks, feasts, and such shows.


Bacon.

3. Proud or ostentatious display; parade; pomp.

    I envy none their pageantry and show.


Young.

4. Semblance; likeness; appearance.

    He through the midst unmarked, In show plebeian angel militant Of
    lowest order, passed.


Milton.

5. False semblance; deceitful appearance; pretense.

    Beware of the scribes, . . . which devour widows' houses, and for a
    shew make long prayers.


Luke xx. 46. 47.

6. (Med.) A discharge, from the vagina, of mucus streaked with blood,
occuring a short time before labor.

7. (Mining) A pale blue flame, at the top of a candle flame, indicating
the presence of fire damp. Raymond.

Show bill, a broad sheet containing an advertisement in large letters.
-- Show box, a box xontaining some object of curiosity carried round as
a show. -- Show card, an advertising placard; also, a card for
displaying samples. -- Show case, a gla&?;ed case, box, or cabinet for
displaying and protecting shopkeepers' wares, articles on exhibition in
museums, etc. -- Show glass, a glass which displays objects; a mirror.
-- Show of hands, a raising of hands to indicate judgment; as, the vote
was taken by a show of hands. -- Show stone, a piece of glass or
crystal supposed to have the property of exhibiting images of persons
or things not present, indicating in that way future events.

Show"bread` (?), n. (Jewish Antiq.) Bread of exhibition; loaves to set
before God; -- the term used in translating the various phrases used in
the Hebrew and Greek to designate the loaves of bread which the priest
of the week placed before the Lord on the golden table in the
sanctuary. They were made of fine flour unleavened, and were changed
every Sabbath. The loaves, twelve in number, represented the twelve
tribes of Israel. They were to be eaten by the priests only, and in the
Holy Place. [Written also shewbread.] Mark ii. 26.

Show"er (?), n. 1. One who shows or exhibits.

2. That which shows; a mirror. [Obs.] Wyclif.

Show"er (?), n. [OE. shour, schour, AS. se&?;r; akin to D. schoer, G.
schauer, OHG. sc&?;r, Icel. sk&?;r, Sw. skur, Goth. sk&?;ra windis a
storm of wind; of uncertain origin.] 1. A fall or rain or hail of short
duration; sometimes, but rarely, a like fall of snow.

    In drought or else showers.


Chaucer.

    Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers.


Milton.

2. That which resembles a shower in falling or passing through the air
copiously and rapidly.

    With showers of stones he drives them far away.


Pope.

3. A copious supply bestowed. [R.]

    He and myself Have travail'd in the great shower of your gifts.


Shak.

Shower bath, a bath in which water is showered from above, and
sometimes from the sides also.

Show"er, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Showered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Showering.]
1. To water with a shower; to &?;&?;t copiously with rain.

    Lest it again dissolve and shower the earth.


Milton.

2. To bestow liberally; to destribute or scatter in &?;undance; to
rain. Shak.

    C&?;sar's favor, That showers down greatness on his friends.


Addison.

Show"er, v. i. To rain in showers; to fall, as in a hower or showers.
Shak.

Show"er*ful (?), a. Full of showers. Tennyson.

Show"er*i*ness (?), n. Quality of being showery.

Show"er*less, a. Rainless; freo from showers.

Show"er*y (?), a. 1. Raining in showers; abounding with frequent
showers of rain.

2. Of or pertaining to a shower or showers. "Colors of the showery
arch." Milton.

Show"i*ly (?), adv. In a showy manner; pompously; with parade.

Show"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being showy; pompousness; great
parade; ostentation.

Show"ing, n. 1. Appearance; display; exhibition.

2. Presentation of facts; statement. J. S. Mill.

Show"ish, a. Showy; ostentatious. Swift.

Show"man (?), n.; pl. Showmen (#). One who exhibits a show; a
proprietor of a show.

Shown (?), p. p. of Show.

Show"room` (?), n. A room or apartment where a show is exhibited.

2. A room where merchandise is exposed for sale, or where samples are
displayed.

Show"y (?), a. [Compar. Showier (&?;); superl. Showiest.] Making a
show; attracting attention; presenting a marked appearance;
ostentatious; gay; gaudy.

    A present of everything that was rich and showy.


Addison.

Syn. -- Splendid; gay; gaudy; gorgeous; fine; magnificent; grand;
stately; sumptuous; pompous.

Shrag (?), n. [CF. Scrag.] A twig of a tree cut off. [Obs.]

Shrag, v. t. To trim, as trees; to lop. [Obs.]

Shrag"ger (?), n. One who lops; one who trims trees. [Obs.] Huloet.

Shram (?), v. t. [Cf. Shrink.] To cause to shrink or shrivel with cold;
to benumb. [Prov. Eng.]

Shrank (?), imp. of Shrink.

{ Shrap (?), Shrape (?), } n. [Cf. Scrap, and Scrape.] A place baited
with chaff to entice birds. [Written also scrap.] [Obs.] Bp. Bedell.

Shrap"nel (?), a. Applied as an appellation to a kind of shell invented
by Gen. H. Shrapnel of the British army. -- n. A shrapnel shell;
shrapnel shells, collectively.

Shrapnel shell (Gunnery), a projectile for a cannon, consisting of a
shell filled with bullets and a small bursting charge to scatter them
at any given point while in flight. See the Note under Case shot.

Shred (?), n. [OE. shrede, schrede, AS. screáde; akin to OD. schroode,
G. schrot a piece cut off, Icel. skrjoðr a shred, and to E. shroud. Cf.
Screed, Scroll, Scrutiny.] 1. A long, narrow piece cut or torn off; a
strip. "Shreds of tanned leather." Bacon.

2. In general, a fragment; a piece; a particle. Shak.

Shred, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shred or Shredded (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shredding.] [OE. shreden, schreden, AS. screádian; akin to OD.
schrooden, OHG. scr&?;tan, G. schroten. See Shred, n.] 1. To cut or
tear into small pieces, particularly narrow and long pieces, as of
cloth or leather. Chaucer.

2. To lop; to prune; to trim. [Obs.]

Shred"cook` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The fieldfare; -- so called from its harsh
cry before rain. [Prov. Eng.]

Shred"ding (?), n. 1. The act of cutting or tearing into shreds.

2. That which is cut or torn off; a piece. Hooker.

Shred"dy (?), a. Consisting of shreds.

Shred"less, a. Having no shreds; without a shred.

    And those which waved are shredless dust ere now.


Byron.

Shrew (?), a. [OE. shrewe, schrewe. Cf. Shrewd.] Wicked; malicious.
[Obs.] Chaucer.

Shrew, n. [See Shrew, a.] 1. Originally, a brawling, turbulent,
vexatious person of either sex, but now restricted in use to females; a
brawler; a scold.

    A man . . . grudgeth that shrews [i. e., bad men] have prosperity,
    or else that good men have adversity.


Chaucer.

    A man had got a shrew to his wife, and there could be no quiet in
    the house for her.


L'Estrange.

2. [AS. screáwa; -- so called because supposed to be venomous. ]
(Zoöl.) Any small insectivore of the genus Sorex and several allied
genera of the family Sorecidæ. In form and color they resemble mice,
but they have a longer and more pointed nose. Some of them are the
smallest of all mammals.

The common European species are the house shrew (Crocidura araneus),
and the erd shrew (Sorex vulgaris) (see under Erd.). In the United
States several species of Sorex and Blarina are common, as the
broadnosed shrew (S. platyrhinus), Cooper's shrew (S. Cooperi), and the
short-tailed, or mole, shrew (Blarina brevicauda). Th American water,
or marsh, shrew (Neosorex palustris), with fringed feet, is less
common. The common European water shrews are Crossopus fodiens, and the
oared shrew (see under Oared).

Earth shrew, any shrewlike burrowing animal of the family Centetidæ, as
the tendrac. -- Elephant shrew, Jumping shrew, Mole shrew. See under
Elephant, Jumping, etc. -- Musk shrew. See Desman. -- River shrew, an
aquatic West African insectivore (Potamogale velox) resembling a weasel
in form and size, but having a large flattened and crested tail adapted
for rapid swimming. It feeds on fishes. -- Shrew mole, a common large
North American mole (Scalops aquaticus). Its fine, soft fur is gray
with iridescent purple tints.

Shrew, v. t. [See Shrew, a., and cf. Beshrew.] To beshrew; to curse.
[Obs.] "I shrew myself." Chaucer.

Shrewd (?), a. [Compar. Shrewder (?); superl. Shrewdest.] [Originally
the p. p. of shrew, v.t.] 1. Inclining to shrew; disposing to curse or
scold; hence, vicious; malicious; evil; wicked; mischievous; vexatious;
rough; unfair; shrewish. [Obs.] Chaucer.

    [Egypt] hath many shrewd havens, because of the great rocks that
    ben strong and dangerous to pass by.


Sir J. Mandeville.

    Every of this happy number That have endured shrewd days and nights
    with us.


Shak.

2. Artful; wily; cunning; arch.

    These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.


Shak.

3. Able or clever in practical affairs; sharp in business; astute;
sharp-witted; sagacious; keen; as, a shrewd observer; a shrewd design;
a shrewd reply.

    Professing to despise the ill opinion of mankind creates a shrewd
    suspicion that we have deserved it.


Secker.

Syn. -- Keen; critical; subtle; artful; astute; sagacious; discerning;
acute; penetrating. -- Shrewd, Sagacious. One who is shrewd is keen to
detect errors, to penetrate disguises, to foresee and guard against the
selfishness of others. Shrewd is a word of less dignity than sagacious,
which implies a comprehensive as well as penetrating mind, whereas
shrewd does not.

-- Shrewd"ly, adv. -- Shrewd"ness, n.

Shrew"ish (?), a. having the qualities of a shrew; having a scolding
disposition; froward; peevish.

    My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours.


Shak.

-- Shrew"ish*ly, adv. -- Shrew"ish*ness, n.

Shrew"mouse` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A shrew; especially, the erd shrew.

Shriek (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shrieked (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shrieking.] [OE. shriken, originallythe same word as E. screech. See
Screech, and cf. Screak.] To utter a loud, sharp, shrill sound or cry,
as do some birds and beasts; to scream, as in a sudden fright, in
horror or anguish.

    It was the owl that shrieked.


Shak.

    At this she shrieked aloud; the mournful train Echoed her grief.


Dryden.

Shriek (?), v. t. To utter sharply and shrilly; to utter in or with a
shriek or shrieks.

    On top whereof aye dwelt the ghostly owl, Shrieking his baleful
    note.


Spenser.

    She shrieked his name To the dark woods.


Moore.

Shriek, n. A sharp, shrill outcry or scream; a shrill wild cry such as
is caused by sudden or extreme terror, pain, or the like.

    Shrieks, clamors, murmurs, fill the frighted town.


Dryden.

Shriek owl. (Zoöl.) (a) The screech owl. (b) The swift; -- so called
from its cry.

Shriek"er (?), n. One who utters a shriek.

Shriev"al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a sheriff.

Shriev"al*ty (?), n. [Contr. from sheriffalty. See Shrieve, n.
Sheriff.] The office, or sphere of jurisdiction, of a sheriff;
sheriffalty.

    It was ordained by 28 Edward I that the people shall have election
    of sheriff in every shire where the shrievalty is not of
    inheritance.


Blackstone.

Shrieve (?), n. [Contr. from OE. shereve. See Sheriff.] A sheriff.
[Obs.] Shak.

Shrieve, v. t. To shrive; to question. [Obs.] "She gan him soft to
shrieve." Spenser.

Shrift (?), n. [OE. shrift, schrift, AS. scrift, fr. scrfan to shrive.
See Shrive.] 1. The act of shriving.

    In shrift and preaching is my diligence.


Chaucer.

2. Confession made to a priest, and the absolution consequent upon it.
Chaucer.

    Have you got leave to go to shrift to- day?


Shak.

    Therefore, my lord, address you to your shrift, And be yourself;
    for you must die this instant.


Rowe.

Shrift father, a priest to whom confession is made.

Shright (?), obs. imp. & p. p. of Shriek.

    She cried alway and shright.


Chaucer.

Shright, n. [See Shriek.] A shriek; shrieking. [Obs] Spenser. "All
hoarse for shright." Chaucer.

Shrike (?), n. [Akin to Icel. skrkja a shrieker, the shrike, and E.
shriek; cf. AS. scrc a thrush. See Shriek, v. i.] (Zoöl.) Any one of
numerous species of oscinine birds of the family Laniidæ, having a
strong hooked bill, toothed at the tip. Most shrikes are insectivorous,
but the common European gray shrike (Lanius excubitor), the great
northern shrike (L. borealis), and several others, kill mice, small
birds, etc., and often impale them on thorns, and are, on that account
called also butcher birds. See under Butcher.

The ant shrikes, or bush shrikes, are clamatorial birds of the family
Formicaridæ. The cuckoo shrikes of the East Indies and Australia are
Oscines of the family Campephagidæ. The drongo shrikes of the same
regions belong to the related family Dicruridæ. See Drongo.

Crow shrike. See under Crow. -- Shrike thrush. (a) Any one of several
species of Asiatic timaline birds of the genera Thamnocataphus,
Gampsorhynchus, and allies. (b) Any one of several species of
shrikelike Australian singing birds of the genus Colluricincla. --
Shrike tit. (a) Any one of several Australian birds of the genus
Falcunculus, having a strong toothed bill and sharp claws. They creep
over the bark of trees, like titmice, in search of insects. (b) Any one
of several species of small Asiatic birds belonging to Allotrius,
Pteruthius, Cutia, Leioptila, and allied genera, related to the true
tits. Called also hill tit. -- Swallow shrike. See under Swallow.

Shrill (?), a. [Compar. Shriller (?); superl. Shrillest.] [OE. shril,
schril; akin to LG. schrell, G. schrill. See Shrill,v. i.] Acute;
sharp; piercing; having or emitting a sharp, piercing tone or sound; --
said of a sound, or of that which produces a sound.

    Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give To sounds confused.


Shak.

    Let winds be shrill, let waves roll high.


Byron.

Shrill, n. A shrill sound. [Obs.] Spenser.

Shrill, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shrilled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shrilling.]
[OE. schrillen, akin to G. schrillen; cf. AS. scralletan to resound
loudly, Icel. skrölta to jolt, Sw. skrälla to shrill, Norw. skryla,
skr&?;la. Cf. Skirl.] To utter an acute, piercing sound; to sound with
a sharp, shrill tone; to become shrill.

    Break we our pipes, that shrilledloud as lark.


Spenser.

    No sounds were heard but of the shrilling cock.


Goldsmith.

    His voice shrilled with passion.


L. Wallace.

Shrill, v. t. To utter or express in a shrill tone; to cause to make a
shrill sound.

    How poor Andromache shrills her dolors forth.


Shak.

Shrill"-gorged` (?), a. Having a throat which produces a shrill note.
[R.] Shak.

Shrill"ness, n. The quality or state of being shrill.

Shrill"-tongued` (?), a. Having a shrill voice. "When shrill-tongued
Fulvia scolds." Shak.

Shril"ly, adv. In a shrill manner; acutely; with a sharp sound or
voice.

Shril"ly, a. Somewhat shrill. [Poetic] Sir W. Scott.

    Some kept up a shrilly mellow sound.


Keats.

Shrimp (?), v. t. [Cf. AS. scrimman to dry up, wither, MHG. schrimpfen
to shrink, G. schrumpfen, Dan. skrumpe, skrumpes, Da. & Sw. skrumpen
shriveled. Cf. Scrimp, Shrink, Shrivel.] To contract; to shrink. [Obs.]

Shrimp, n. [OE. shrimp; -- probably so named from its shriveled
appearance. See Shrimp, v.] 1. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of numerous species
of macruran Crustacea belonging to Crangon and various allied genera,
having a slender body and long legs. Many of them are used as food. The
larger kinds are called also prawns. See Illust. of Decapoda. (b) In a
more general sense, any species of the macruran tribe Caridea, or any
species of the order Schizopoda, having a similar form. (c) In a loose
sense, any small crustacean, including some amphipods and even certain
entomostracans; as, the fairy shrimp, and brine shrimp. See under
Fairy, and Brine.

<! p. 1335 !>

2. Figuratively, a little wrinkled man; a dwarf; -- in contempt.

    This weak and writhled shrimp.


Shak.

Opossum shrimp. (Zoöl.) See under Opossum. -- Spector shrimp, or
Skeleton shrimp (Zoöl.), any slender amphipod crustacean of the genus
Caprella and allied genera. See Illust. under Læmodopoda. -- Shrimp
catcher (Zoöl.), the little tern (Sterna minuta). -- Shrimp net, a
dredge net fixed upon a pole, or a sweep net dragged over the fishing
ground.

Shrimp"er (?), n. One who fishes for shrimps.

Shrine (shrn), n. [OE. schrin, AS. scrn, from L. scrinium a case,
chest, box.] 1. A case, box, or receptacle, especially one in which are
deposited sacred relics, as the bones of a saint.

2. Any sacred place, as an altar, tromb, or the like.

    Too weak the sacred shrine guard.


Byron.

3. A place or object hallowed from its history or associations; as, a
shrine of art.

Shrine, v. t. To enshrine; to place reverently, as in a shrine.
"Shrined in his sanctuary." Milton.

Shrink (?), v. i. [imp. Shrank (?) or Shrunk (?) p. p. Shrunk or
Shrunken (&?;), but the latter is now seldom used except as a
participial adjective; p. pr. & vb. n. Shrinking.] [OE. shrinken,
schrinken, AS. scrincan; akin to OD. schrincken, and probably to Sw.
skrynka a wrinkle, skrynkla to wrinkle, to rumple, and E. shrimp, n. &
v., scrimp. CF. Shrimp.] 1. To wrinkle, bend, or curl; to shrivel;
hence, to contract into a less extent or compass; to gather together;
to become compacted.

    And on a broken reed he still did stay His feeble steps, which
    shrunk when hard thereon he lay.


Spenser.

    I have not found that water, by mixture of ashes, will shrink or
    draw into less room.


Bacon.

    Against this fire do I shrink up.


Shak.

    And shrink like parchment in consuming fire.


Dryden.

    All the boards did shrink.


Coleridge.

2. To withdraw or retire, as from danger; to decline action from fear;
to recoil, as in fear, horror, or distress.

    What happier natures shrink at with affright, The hard inhabitant
    contends is right.


Pope.

    They assisted us against the Thebans when you shrank from the task.


Jowett (Thucyd.)

3. To express fear, horror, or pain by contracting the body, or part of
it; to shudder; to quake. [R.] Shak.

Shrink, v. t. 1. To cause to contract or shrink; as, to shrink finnel
by imersing it in boiling water.

2. To draw back; to withdraw. [Obs.]

    The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn.


Milton.

To shrink on (Mach.), to fix (one piece or part) firmly around
(another) by natural contraction in cooling, as a tire on a wheel, or a
hoop upon a cannon, which is made slightly smaller than the part it is
to fit, and expanded by heat till it can be slipped into place.

Shrink, n. The act shrinking; shrinkage; contraction; also, recoil;
withdrawal.

    Yet almost wish, with sudden shrink, That I had less to praise.


Leigh Hunt.

Shrink"age (?), n. 1. The act of shrinking; a contraction into less
bulk or measurement.

2. The amount of such contraction; the bulk or dimension lost by
shrinking, as of grain, castings, etc.

3. Decrease in value; depreciation. [Colloq.]

Shrink"er (?), n. One who shrinks; one who withdraws from danger.

Shrink"ing, a. & n. from Shrink.

Shrinking head (Founding), a body of molten metal connected with a mold
for the purpose of supplying metal to compensate for the shrinkage of
the casting; -- called also sinking head, and riser.

Shrink"ing*ly, adv. In a shrinking manner.

Shriv"al*ty (?), n. Shrievalty. Johnson.

Shrive (?), v. t. [imp. Shrived (?) or Shrove (&?;); p. p. Shriven (?)
or Shrived; p. pr. & vb. n. Shriving.] [OE. shriven, schriven, AS.
scrvan to shrive, to impose penance or punishment; akin to OFries.
skrva to impose punishment; cf. OS. biskrban to be troubled. Cf.
Shrift, Shrovetide.] 1. To hear or receive the confession of; to
administer confession and absolution to; -- said of a priest as the
agent.

    That they should shrive their parishioners.


Piers Plowman.

    Doubtless he shrives this woman, . . . Else ne'er could he so long
    protract his speech.


Shak.

    Till my guilty soul be shriven.


Longfellow.

2. To confess, and receive absolution; -- used reflexively.

    Get you to the church and shrive yourself.


Beau. & Fl.

Shrive, v. i. To receive confessions, as a priest; to administer
confession and absolution. Spenser.

Shriv"el (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shriveled (?) or Shrivelled; p. pr. &
vb. n. Shriveling or Shrivelling.] [Probably akin to shrimp, shrink;
cf. dial. AS. screpa to pine away, Norw. skrypa to waste, skryp, skryv,
transitory, frail, Sw. skröpling feeble, Dan. skröbelig, Icel.
skrj&?;pr brittle, frail.] To draw, or be drawn, into wrinkles; to
shrink, and form corrugations; as, a leaf shriveles in the hot sun; the
skin shrivels with age; -- often with up.

Shriv"el (?), v. t. To cause to shrivel or contract; to cause to shrink
onto corruptions.

Shriv"en (?), p. p. of Shrive.

Shriv"er (?), n. One who shrives; a confessor.

Shriv"ing, n. Shrift; confession. Spenser.

Shroff (?), n. [Ar. sarrf.] A banker, or changer of money. [East
Indies]

Shroff"age (?), n. The examination of coins, and the separation of the
good from the debased. [East Indies]

Shrood (?), v. t. [Cf. Shroud.] [Written also shroud, and shrowd.] To
trim; to lop. [Prov. Eng.]

Shroud (shroud), n. [OE. shroud, shrud, schrud, AS. scrd a garment,
clothing; akin to Icel. skruð the shrouds of a ship, furniture of a
church, a kind of stuff, Sw. skrud dress, attire, and E. shred. See
Shred, and cf. Shrood.] 1. That which clothes, covers, conceals, or
protects; a garment. Piers Plowman.

    Swaddled, as new born, in sable shrouds.


Sandys.

2. Especially, the dress for the dead; a winding sheet. "A dead man in
his shroud." Shak.

3. That which covers or shelters like a shroud.

    Jura answers through her misty shroud.


Byron.

4. A covered place used as a retreat or shelter, as a cave or den;
also, a vault or crypt. [Obs.]

    The shroud to which he won His fair-eyed oxen.


Chapman.

    A vault, or shroud, as under a church.


Withals.

5. The branching top of a tree; foliage. [R.]

    The Assyrian wad a cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches and with a
    shadowing shroad.


Ezek. xxxi. 3.

6. pl. (Naut.) A set of ropes serving as stays to support the masts.
The lower shrouds are secured to the sides of vessels by heavy iron
bolts and are passed around the head of the lower masts.

7. (Mach.) One of the two annular plates at the periphery of a water
wheel, which form the sides of the buckets; a shroud plate.

Bowsprit shrouds (Naut.), ropes extending from the head of the bowsprit
to the sides of the vessel. -- Futtock shrouds (Naut.), iron rods
connecting the topmast rigging with the lower rigging, passing over the
edge of the top. -- Shroud plate. (a) (Naut.) An iron plate extending
from the dead-eyes to the ship's side. Ham. Nav. Encyc. (b) (Mach.) A
shroud. See def. 7, above.

Shroud, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shrouded; p. pr. & vb. n. Shrouding.] [Cf.
AS. scr&?;dan. See Shroud, n.] 1. To cover with a shroud; especially,
to inclose in a winding sheet; to dress for the grave.

    The ancient Egyptian mummies were shrouded in a number of folds of
    linen besmeared with gums.


Bacon.

2. To cover, as with a shroud; to protect completely; to cover so as to
conceal; to hide; to veil.

    One of these trees, with all his young ones, may shroud four
    hundred horsemen.


Sir W. Raleigh.

    Some tempest rise, And blow out all the stars that light the skies,
    To shroud my shame.


Dryden.

Shroud, v. i. To take shelter or harbor. [Obs.]

    If your stray attendance be yet lodged, Or shroud within these
    limits.


Milton.

Shroud, v. t. To lop. See Shrood. [Prov. Eng.]

Shroud"ed, a. Provided with a shroud or shrouds.

Shrouded gear (Mach.), a cogwheel or pinion having flanges which form
closed ends to the spaces between the teeth and thus strengthen the
teeth by tying them together.

Shroud"ing, n. The shrouds. See Shroud, n., 7.

Shroud"-laid` (?), a. Composed of four strands, and laid right-handed
with a heart, or center; -- said of rope. See Illust. under Cordage.

Shroud"less, a. Without a shroud.

Shroud"y (?), a. Affording shelter. [R.] Milton.

Shrove (?), imp. of Shrive.

Shrove Sunday, Quinguagesima Sunday. -- Shrove Tuesday, the Tuesday
following Quinguagesima Sunday, and preceding the first day of Lent, or
Ash Wednesday. It was formerly customary in England, on this day, for
the people to confess their sins to their parish priests, after which
they dined on pancakes, or fritters, and the occasion became one of
merriment. The bell rung on this day is popularly called Pancake Bell,
and the day itself Pancake Tuesday. P. Cyc.

Shrove, v. i. To join in the festivities of Shrovetide; hence, to make
merry. [Obs.] J. Fletcher.

Shrove"tide` (?), n. [From shrive to take a confession (OE. imp. shrof,
AS. scrf) + tide.] The days immediately preceding Ash Widnesday,
especially the period between the evening before Quinguagesima Sunday
and the morning of Ash Wednesday.

Shrov"ing, n. The festivity of Shrovetide. [Obs.]

Shrow (?), n. A shrew. [Obs.] Shak.

Shrowd (?), v. t. See Shrood. [Prov. Eng.]

Shrub (?), n. [Ar. shirb, shurb, a drink, beverage, fr. shariba to
drink. Cf. Sirup, Sherbet.] A liquor composed of vegetable acid,
especially lemon juice, and sugar, with spirit to preserve it.

Shrub, n. [OE. schrob, AS. scrob, scrobb; akin to Norw. skrubba the
dwarf cornel tree.] (Bot.) A woody plant of less size than a tree, and
usually with several stems from the same root.

Shrub, v. t. To lop; to prune. [Obs.] Anderson (1573).

Shrub"ber*y (?), n.; pl. Shrubberies (&?;). 1. A collection of shrubs.

2. A place where shrubs are planted. Macaulay.

Shrub"bi*ness (?), n. Quality of being shrubby.

Shrub"by (?), a. [Compar. Shrubbier (?); superl. Shrubbiest.] 1. Full
of shrubs.

2. Of the nature of a shrub; resembling a shrub. "Shrubby browse." J.
Philips.

Shrub"less, a. having no shrubs. Byron.

Shruff (?), n. [Cf. Scruff, Scurf.] Rubbish. Specifically: (a) Dross or
refuse of metals. [Obs.] (b) Light, dry wood, or stuff used for fuel.
[Prov. Eng.]

Shrug (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shrugged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shrugging
(?).] [Probably akin to shrink, p. p. shrunk; cf. Dan. skrugge,
skrukke, to stoop, dial. Sw. skrukka, skruga, to crouch.] To draw up or
contract (the shoulders), especially by way of expressing dislike,
dread, doubt, or the like.

    He shrugs his shoulders when you talk of securities.


Addison.

Shrug, v. i. To raise or draw up the shoulders, as in expressing
dislike, dread, doubt, or the like.

    They grin, they shrug. They bow, they snarl, they snatch, they hug.


Swift.

Shrug, n. A drawing up of the shoulders, -- a motion usually expressing
dislike, dread, or doubt.

    The Spaniards talk in dialogues Of heads and shoulders, nods and
    shrugs.


Hudibras.

Shrunk"en (?), p. p. & a. from Shrink.

Shuck (?), n. A shock of grain. [Prev.Eng.]

Shuck, n. [Perhaps akin to G. shote a husk, pod, shell.] 1. A shell,
husk, or pod; especially, the outer covering of such nuts as the
hickory nut, butternut, peanut, and chestnut.

2. The shell of an oyster or clam. [U. S.]

Shuck, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shucked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shucking.] To
deprive of the shucks or husks; as, to shuck walnuts, Indian corn,
oysters, etc.

Shuck"er (?), n. One who shucks oysters or clams

Shud"der (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shuddered (?);p. pr. & vb. n.
Shuddering.] [OE. shoderen, schuderen; akin to LG. schuddern, D.
schudden to shake, OS. skuddian, G. schaudern to shudder, schütteln to
shake, schütten to pour, to shed, OHG. scutten, scuten, to shake.] To
tremble or shake with fear, horrer, or aversion; to shiver with cold;
to quake. "With shuddering horror pale." Milton.

    The shuddering tennant of the frigid zone.


Goldsmith.

Shud"der, n. The act of shuddering, as with fear. Shak.

Shud"der*ing*ly, adv. In a shuddering manner.

Shude (?), n. The husks and other refuse of rice mills, used to
adulterate oil cake, or linseed cake.

Shuf"fle (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shuffled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Shuffling (?).] [Originally the same word as scuffle, and properly a
freq. of shove. See Shove, and Scuffle.] 1. To shove one way and the
other; to push from one to another; as, to shuffle money from hand to
hand.

2. To mix by pushing or shoving; to confuse; to throw into disorder;
especially, to change the relative positions of, as of the cards in a
pack.

    A man may shuffle cards or rattle dice from noon to midnight
    without tracing a new idea in his mind.


Rombler.

3. To remove or introduce by artificial confusion.

    It was contrived by your enemies, and shuffled into the papers that
    were seizen.


Dryden.

To shuffe off, to push off; to rid one's self of. -- To shuffe up, to
throw together in hastel to make up or form in confusion or with
fraudulent disorder; as, he shuffled up a peace.

Shuf"fle, v. i. 1. To change the relative position of cards in a pack;
as, to shuffle and cut.

2. To change one's position; to shift ground; to evade questions; to
resort to equivocation; to prevaricate.

    I myself, . . . hiding mine honor in my necessity, am fain to
    shuffle.


Shak.

3. To use arts or expedients; to make shift.

    Your life, good master, Must shuffle for itself.


Shak.

4. To move in a slovenly, dragging manner; to drag or scrape the feet
in walking or dancing.

    The aged creature came Shuffling along with ivory-headed wand.


Keats.

Syn. -- To equivicate; prevaricate; quibble; cavil; shift;
sophisticate; juggle.

Shuf"fle, n. 1. The act of shuffling; a mixing confusedly; a slovenly,
dragging motion.

    The unguided agitation and rude shuffles of matter.


Bentley.

2. A trick; an artifice; an evasion.

    The gifts of nature are beyond all shame and shuffles.


L'Estrange.

Shuf"fle*board` (?), n. See Shovelboard.

Shuf"fle*cap` (?), n. A play performed by shaking money in a hat or
cap. [R.] Arbuthnot.

Shuf"fler (?), n. 1. One who shuffles.

2. (Zoöl.) Either one of the three common American scaup ducks. See
Scaup duck, under Scaup.

Shuf"fle*wing` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The hedg sparrow. [Prov. Eng.]

Shuf"fling (?), a. 1. Moving with a dragging, scraping step. "A
shuffling nag." Shak.

2. Evasive; as, a shuffling excuse. T. Burnet.

Shuf"fling, v. In a shuffling manner.

Shug (?), v. i. [Cf. Shrug.] 1. To writhe the body so as to produce
friction against one's clothes, as do those who have the itch. [Prov.
Eng.] Halliwell.

2. Hence, to crawl; to sneak. [Obs.]

    There I 'll shug in and get a noble countenance.


Ford.

Shu"mac (?), n. (Bot.) Sumac.

Shun (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shunned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shunning.]
[OE. shunien, schunien, schonien, AS. scunian, sceonian; cf. D.
schuinen to slepe, schuin oblique, sloping, Icel. skunda, skynda, to
hasten. Cf. Schooner, Scoundrel, Shunt.] To avoid; to keep clear of; to
get out of the way of; to escape from; to eschew; as, to shun rocks,
shoals, vice.

    I am pure from the blood of all men. For I have not shunned to
    declare unto you all the counsel of God.


Acts xx. 26,27.

    Scarcity and want shall shun you.


Shak.

Syn. -- See Avoid.

Shun"less, a. Not to be shunned; inevitable; unavoidable. [R.]
"Shunless destiny." Shak.

<! p. 1336 !>

Shunt (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shunted; p. pr. & vb. n. Shunting.]
[Prov. E., to move from, to put off, fr. OE. shunten, schunten,
schounten; cf. D. schuinte a slant, slope, Icel. skunda to hasten. Cf.
Shun.] 1. To shun; to move from. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

2. To cause to move suddenly; to give a sudden start to; to shove.
[Obs. or Prov. Eng.] Ash.

3. To turn off to one side; especially, to turn off, as a grain or a
car upon a side track; to switch off; to shift.

    For shunting your late partner on to me.


T. Hughes.

4. (Elec.) To provide with a shunt; as, to shunt a galvanometer.

Shunt (?), v. i. To go aside; to turn off.

Shunt, n. [Cf. D. schuinte slant, slope, declivity. See Shunt, v. t.]
1. (Railroad) A turning off to a side or short track, that the
principal track may be left free.

2. (Elec.) A conducting circuit joining two points in a conductor, or
the terminals of a galvanometer or dynamo, so as to form a parallel or
derived circuit through which a portion of the current may pass, for
the purpose of regulating the amount passing in the main circuit.

3. (Gunnery) The shifting of the studs on a projectile from the deep to
the shallow sides of the grooves in its discharge from a shunt gun.

Shunt dynamo (Elec.), a dynamo in which the field circuit is connected
with the main circuit so as to form a shunt to the letter, thus
employing a portion of the current from the armature to maintain the
field. -- Shunt gun, a firearm having shunt rifling. See under Rifling.

Shunt"er (?), n. (Railroad) A person employed to shunt cars from one
track to another.

Shut (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Shut; p. pr. & vb. n. Shutting.] [OE.
shutten, schutten, shetten, schitten, AS. scyttan to shut or lock up
(akin to D. schutten, G. schützen to protect), properly, to fasten with
a bolt or bar shot across, fr. AS. sceótan to shoot. &radic;159. See
Shoot.] 1. To close so as to hinder ingress or egress; as, to shut a
door or a gate; to shut one's eyes or mouth.

2. To forbid entrance into; to prohibit; to bar; as, to shut the ports
of a country by a blockade.

    Shall that be shut to man which to the beast Is open?


Milton.

3. To preclude; to exclude; to bar out. "Shut from every shore."
Dryden.

4. To fold together; to close over, as the fingers; to close by
bringing the parts together; as, to shut the hand; to shut a book.

To shut in. (a) To inclose; to confine. "The Lord shut him in." Cen.
vii. 16. (b) To cover or intercept the view of; as, one point shuts in
another. -- To shut off. (a) To exclude. (b) To prevent the passage of,
as steam through a pipe, or water through a flume, by closing a cock,
valve, or gate. -- To shut out, to preclude from entering; to deny
admission to; to exclude; as, to shut out rain by a tight roof. -- To
shut together, to unite; to close, especially to close by welding. --
To shut up. (a) To close; to make fast the entrances into; as, to shut
up a house. (b) To obstruct. "Dangerous rocks shut up the passage." Sir
W. Raleigh. (c) To inclose; to confine; to imprison; to fasten in; as,
to shut up a prisoner.

    Before faith came, we were kept under the law, shut up unto the
    faith which should afterwards be revealed.


Gal. iii. 23.

(d) To end; to terminate; to conclude.

    When the scene of life is shut up, the slave will be above his
    master if he has acted better.


Collier.

(e) To unite, as two pieces of metal by welding. (f) To cause to become
silent by authority, argument, or force.

Shut, v. i. To close itself; to become closed; as, the door shuts; it
shuts hard.

To shut up, to cease speaking. [Colloq.] T. Hughes.

Shut, a. 1. Closed or fastened; as, a shut door.

2. Rid; clear; free; as, to get shut of a person. [Now dialectical or
local, Eng. & U.S.] L'Estrange.

3. (Phon.) (a) Formed by complete closure of the mouth passage, and
with the nose passage remaining closed; stopped, as are the mute
consonants, p, t, k, b, d, and hard g. H. Sweet. (b) Cut off sharply
and abruptly by a following consonant in the same syllable, as the
English short vowels, , , , , , always are.

Shut, n. The act or time of shutting; close; as, the shut of a door.

    Just then returned at shut of evening flowers.


Milton.

2. A door or cover; a shutter. [Obs.] Sir I. Newton.

3. The line or place where two pieces of metal are united by welding.

Cold shut, the imperfection in a casting caused by the flowing of
liquid metal upon partially chilled metal; also, the imperfect weld in
a forging caused by the inadequate heat of one surface under working.

Shute (?), n. Same as Chute, or Shoot.

Shut"ter (?), n. 1. One who shuts or closes.

2. A movable cover or screen for a window, designed to shut out the
light, to obstruct the view, or to be of some strength as a defense; a
blind.

3. A removable cover, or a gate, for closing an aperture of any kind,
as for closing the passageway for molten iron from a ladle.

Shut"tered (?), a. Furnished with shutters.

Shut"tle (?), n. [Also shittle, OE. schitel, scytyl, schetyl; cf. OE.
schitel a bolt of a door, AS. scyttes; all from AS. sceótan to shoot;
akin to Dan. skyttel, skytte, shuttle, dial. Sw. skyttel, sköttel.
&radic;159. See Shoot, and cf. Shittle, Skittles.] 1. An instrument
used in weaving for passing or shooting the thread of the woof from one
side of the cloth to the other between the threads of the warp.

    Like shuttles through the loom, so swiftly glide My feathered
    hours.


Sandys.

2. The sliding thread holder in a sewing machine, which carries the
lower thread through a loop of the upper thread, to make a lock stitch.

3. A shutter, as for a channel for molten metal. [R.]

Shuttle box (Weaving), a case at the end of a shuttle race, to receive
the shuttle after it has passed the thread of the warp; also, one of a
set of compartments containing shuttles with different colored threads,
which are passed back and forth in a certain order, according to the
pattern of the cloth woven. -- Shutten race, a sort of shelf in a loom,
beneath the warp, along which the shuttle passes; a channel or guide
along which the shuttle passes in a sewing machine. -- Shuttle shell
(Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of marine gastropods of the genus
Volva, or Radius, having a smooth, spindle-shaped shell prolonged into
a channel at each end.

Shut"tle (?), v. i. To move backwards and forwards, like a shuttle.

    I had to fly far and wide, shutting athwart the big Babel, wherever
    his calls and pauses had to be.


Carlyle.

Shut"tle*cock` (?), n. A cork stuck with feathers, which is to be
struck by a battledoor in play; also, the play itself.

Shut"tle*cock, v. t. To send or toss to and fro; to bandy; as, to
shuttlecock words. Thackeray.

Shut"tle*cork` (?), n. See Shuttlecock.

Shut"tle*wise` (?), adv. Back and forth, like the movement of a
shuttle.

Shwan"-pan (?), n. See Schwan- pan.

Shy (sh), a. [Compar. Shier (-r) or Shyer; superl. Shiest or Shyest.]
[OE. schey, skey, sceouh, AS. sceóh; akin to Dan. sky, Sw. skygg, D.
schuw, MHG. schiech, G. scheu, OHG. sciuhen to be or make timid. Cf.
Eschew.] 1. Easily frightened; timid; as, a shy bird.

    The horses of the army . . . were no longer shy, but would come up
    to my very feet without starting.


Swift.

2. Reserved; coy; disinclined to familiar approach.

    What makes you so shy, my good friend? There's nobody loves you
    better than I.


Arbuthnot.

    The embarrassed look of shy distress And maidenly shamefacedness.


Wordsworth.

3. Cautious; wary; suspicious.

    I am very shy of using corrosive liquors in the preparation of
    medicines.


Boyle.

    Princes are, by wisdom of state, somewhat shy of thier successors.


Sir H. Wotton.

To fight shy. See under Fight, v. i.

Shy, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Shied (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Shying.] [From Shy,
a.] To start suddenly aside through fright or suspicion; -- said
especially of horses.

Shy, v. t. To throw sidewise with a jerk; to fling; as, to shy a stone;
to shy a slipper. T. Hughes.

Shy, n. 1. A sudden start aside, as by a horse.

2. A side throw; a throw; a fling. Thackeray.

    If Lord Brougham gets a stone in his hand, he must, it seems, have
    a shy at somebody.


Punch.

Shy"ly, adv. In a shy or timid manner; not familiarly; with reserve.
[Written also shily.]

Shy"ness, n. The quality or state of being shy. [Written also shiness.]

    Frequency in heavenly contemplation is particularly important to
    prevent a shyness bewtween God and thy soul.


Baxter.

Syn. -- Bashfulness; reserve; coyness; timidity; diffidence. See
Bashfulness.

Shy"ster (?), n. [Perh. from G. scheisse excrement.] A trickish knave;
one who carries on any business, especially legal business, in a mean
and dishonest way. [Slang, U.S.]

Si (?). [It.] (Mus.) A syllable applied, in solmization, to the note B;
more recently, to the seventh tone of any major diatonic scale. It was
added to Guido's scale by Le Maire about the end of the 17th century.

||Si*a"ga (?), n. (Zoöl.) The ahu, or jairou.

Si*al"o*gogue (?), n. [Gr. si`alon saliva + &?;&?;&?;&?; leading, from
&?;&?;&?; to lead: cf. F. sialagogue.] (Med.) An agent which promotes
the flow of saliva.

||Si"a*mang` (?), n. [Malay simang.] (Zool.) A gibbon (Hylobates
||syndactylus), native of Sumatra. It has the second and third toes
||partially united by a web.

Si`a*mese" (?), a. Of or pertaining to Siam, its native people, or
their language.

Si`a*mese`, n. sing. & pl. 1. A native or inhabitant of Siam; pl., the
people of Siam.

2. sing. The language of the Siamese.

Sib (?), n. [AS. sibb alliance, gesib a relative. &radic;289. See
Gossip.] A blood relation. [Obs.] Nash.

Sib, a. Related by blood; akin. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. & Scot.] Sir W.
Scott.

    Your kindred is but . . . little sib to you.


Chaucer.

    [He] is no fairy birn, ne sib at all To elfs, but sprung of seed
    terrestrial.


Spenser.

Sib"bens (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] (Med.) A contagious disease,
endemic in Scotland, resembling the yaws. It is marked by ulceration of
the throat and nose and by pustules and soft fungous excrescences upon
the surface of the body. In the Orkneys the name is applied to the
itch. [Written also sivvens.]

Si*be"ri*an (?), a. [From Siberia, Russ. Sibire.] Of or pertaining to
Siberia, a region comprising all northern Asia and belonging to Russia;
as, a Siberian winter. -- n. A native or inhabitant of Siberia.

Siberian crab (Bot.), the Siberian crab apple. See Crab apple, under
Crab. -- Siberian dog (Zoöl.), one of a large breed of dogs having
erect ears and the hair of the body and tail very long. It is
distinguished for endurance of fatigue when used for the purpose of
draught. -- Siberian pea tree (Bot.), a small leguminous tree (Cragana
arborescens) with yellow flowers. It is a native of Siberia.

{ Sib"i*lance (?), Sib"i*lan*cy (?), } n. The quality or state of being
sibilant; sibilation.

    Milton would not have avoided them for their sibilancy, he who
    wrote . . . verses that hiss like Medusa's head in wrath.


Lowell.

Sib"i*lant (?), a. [L. sibilans, -antis, p. pr. of sibilare to hiss:
cf. F. sibilant.] Making a hissing sound; uttered with a hissing sound;
hissing; as, s, z, sh, and zh, are sibilant elementary sounds. -- n. A
sibiliant letter.

Sib"i*late (?), v. t. & i. To pronounce with a hissing sound, like that
of the letter s; to mark with a character indicating such
pronunciation.

Sib`i*la"tion (?), n. [L. sibilatio.] Utterance with a hissing sound;
also, the sound itself; a hiss.

    He, with a long, low sibilation, stared.


Tennyson.

Sib"i*la*to*ry (?), a. Hissing; sibilant.

Sib"i*lous (?), a. [L. sibilus.] Having a hissing sound; hissing;
sibilant. [R.] Pennant.

Sib"yl (?), n. [L. sibylla, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;.] 1. (Class. Antiq.) A
woman supposed to be endowed with a spirit of prophecy.

The number of the sibyls is variously stated by different authors; but
the opinion of Varro, that there were ten, is generally adopted. They
dwelt in various parts of Persia, Greece, and Italy.

2. A female fortune teller; a pythoness; a prophetess. "An old highland
sibyl." Sir W. Scott.

Sib"yl*ist, n. One who believes in a sibyl or the sibylline prophecies.
Cudworth.

Sib"yl*line (?), a. [L. sibyllinus.] Pertaining to the sibyls; uttered,
written, or composed by sibyls; like the productions of sibyls.

Sibylline books. (a) (Rom. Antiq.) Books or documents of prophecies in
verse concerning the fate of the Roman empire, said to have been
purchased by Tarquin the Proud from a sibyl. (b) Certain Jewish and
early Christian writings purporting to have been prophetic and of
sibylline origin. They date from 100 b. c. to a. d. 500.

Sic (?), a. Such. [Scot.]

||Sic (?), adv. [L.] Thus.

This word is sometimes inserted in a quotation [sic], to call attention
to the fact that some remarkable or inaccurate expression, misspelling,
or the like, is literally reproduced.

Sic"a*more (?), n. (Bot.) See Sycamore.

||Sic"ca (?), n. [Ar. sikka.] A seal; a coining die; -- used
||adjectively to designate the silver currency of the Mogul emperors,
||or the Indian rupee of 192 grains.

Sicca rupee, an East Indian coin, valued nominally at about two
shillings sterling, or fifty cents.

Sic"cate (?), v. t. [L. siccatus, p. p. of siccare to dry, fr. siecus
dry.] To dry. [R.]

Sic*ca"tion (?), n. [L. siccatio.] The act or process of drying. [R.]
Bailey.

Sic"ca*tive (?), a. [L. siccativus.] Drying; causing to dry. -- n. That
which promotes drying.

Sic*cif"ic (?), a.[L. siccificus; siccus dry + facere to make. See
-fy.] Causing dryness.

Sic"ci*ty (?), n. [L. siccitas, fr. siccus dry.] Dryness; aridity;
destitution of moisture. [Obs.]

    The siccity and dryness of its flesh.


Sir T. Browne.

Sice (?), n. [F. six, fr. L. sex six. See Six.] The number six at dice.

Si"cer (?), n. [L. sicera. See Cider.] A strong drink; cider. [Obs.]
Chaucer.

Sich (?), a. Such. [Obs. or Colloq.] Spenser.

Si*cil"i*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Sicily or its inhabitants.

Sicilian vespers, the great massacre of the French in Sicily, in the
year 1282, on the evening of Easter Monday, at the hour of vespers.

Si*cil"i*an, n. A native or inhabitant of Sicily.

||Si*ci`li*a"no (?), n. [It., Sicilian.] A Sicilian dance, resembling
||the pastorale, set to a rather slow and graceful melody in 12-8 or
||6-8 measure; also, the music to the dance.

||Si`ci`lienne" (?), n. [F., fem. of sicilien Sicilian.] A kind of rich
||poplin.

Sick (?), a. [Compar. Sicker (?); superl. Sickest.] [OE. sek, sik, ill,
AS. seóc; akin to OS. siok, seoc, OFries. siak, D. ziek, G. siech, OHG.
sioh, Icel. sj&?;kr, Sw. sjuk, Dan. syg, Goth. siuks ill, siukan to be
ill.] 1. Affected with disease of any kind; ill; indisposed; not in
health. See the Synonym under Illness.

    Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever.


Mark i. 30.

    Behold them that are sick with famine.


Jer. xiv. 18.

2. Affected with, or attended by, nausea; inclined to vomit; as, sick
at the stomach; a sick headache.

3. Having a strong dislike; disgusted; surfeited; -- with of; as, to be
sick of flattery.

    He was not so sick of his master as of his work.


L'Estrange.

4. Corrupted; imperfect; impaired; weakned.

    So great is his antipathy against episcopacy, that, if a seraphim
    himself should be a bishop, he would either find or make some sick
    feathers in his wings.


Fuller.

Sick bay (Naut.), an apartment in a vessel, used as the ship's
hospital. -- Sick bed, the bed upon which a person lies sick. -- Sick
berth, an apartment for the sick in a ship of war. -- Sick headache
(Med.), a variety of headache attended with disorder of the stomach and
nausea. -- Sick list, a list containing the names of the sick. -- Sick
room, a room in which a person lies sick, or to which he is confined by
sickness. [These terms, sick bed, sick berth, etc., are also written
both hyphened and solid.]

Syn. -- Diseased; ill; disordered; distempered; indisposed; weak;
ailing; feeble; morbid.

Sick, n. Sickness. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sick, v. i. To fall sick; to sicken. [Obs.] Shak.

Sick"-brained` (?), a. Disordered in the brain.

Sick"en (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sickened (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sickening.] 1. To make sick; to disease.

    Raise this strength, and sicken that to death.


Prior.

2. To make qualmish; to nauseate; to disgust; as, to sicken the
stomach.

3. To impair; to weaken. [Obs.] Shak.

Sick"en, v. i. 1. To become sick; to fall into disease.

    The judges that sat upon the jail, and those that attended,
    sickened upon it and died.


Bacon.

2. To be filled to disgust; to be disgusted or nauseated; to be filled
with abhorrence or aversion; to be surfeited or satiated.

    Mine eyes did sicken at the sight.


Shak.

<! p. 1337 !>

3. To become disgusting or tedious.

    The toiling pleasure sickens into pain.


Goldsmith.

4. To become weak; to decay; to languish.

    All pleasures sicken, and all glories sink.


Pope.

Sick"en*ing (?), a. Causing sickness; specif., causing surfeit or
disgust; nauseating. -- Sick"en*ing*ly, adv.

Sick"er (?), v. i. [AS. sicerian.] (Mining) To percolate, trickle, or
ooze, as water through a crack. [Also written sigger, zigger, and
zifhyr.] [Prov. Eng.]

{ Sick"er, Sik"er }, a. [OE. siker; cf. OS. sikur, LG. seker, D. zeker,
Dan. sikker, OHG. sihhur, G. sicher; all fr. L. securus. See Secure,
Sure.] Sure; certain; trusty. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. & Scot.] Burns.

    When he is siker of his good name.


Chaucer.

{ Sick"er, Sik"er }, adv. Surely; certainly. [Obs.]

    Believe this as siker as your creed.


Chaucer.

    Sicker, Willye, thou warnest well.


Spenser.

{ Sick"er*ly, Sik"er*ly }, adv. Surely; securely. [Obs.]

    But sikerly, withouten any fable.


Chaucer.

{ Sick"er*ness, Sik"er*ness }, n. The quality or state of being sicker,
or certain. [Obs.] Chaucer. Spenser.

Sick"ish, a. 1. Somewhat sick or diseased.

2. Somewhat sickening; as, a sickish taste.

-- Sick"ish*ly, adv. -- Sick"ish*ness, n.

Sic"kle (?), n. [OE. sikel, AS. sicol; akin to D. sikkel, G. sichel,
OHG. sihhila, Dan. segel, segl, L. secula, fr. secare to cut; or
perhaps from L. secula. See Saw a cutting instrument.] 1. A reaping
instrument consisting of a steel blade curved into the form of a hook,
and having a handle fitted on a tang. The sickle has one side of the
blade notched, so as always to sharpen with a serrated edge. Cf.
Reaping hook, under Reap.

    When corn has once felt the sickle, it has no more benefit from the
    sunshine.


Shak.

2. (Astron.) A group of stars in the constellation Leo. See Illust. of
Leo.

Sickle pod (Bot.), a kind of rock cress (Arabis Canadensis) having very
long curved pods.

Sic"kle*bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of three species of humming
birds of the genus Eutoxeres, native of Central and South America. They
have a long and strongly curved bill. Called also the sickle-billed
hummer. (b) A curlew. (c) A bird of the genus Epimachus and allied
genera.

Sic"kled (?), a. Furnished with a sickle.

Sic"kle*man (?), n.; pl. Sicklemen (&?;). One who uses a sickle; a
reaper.

    You sunburned sicklemen, of August weary.


Shak.

Sic"kler (?), n. One who uses a sickle; a sickleman; a reaper.

Sick"less (?), a. Free from sickness. [R.]

    Give me long breath, young beds, and sickless ease.


Marston.

Sic"kle*wort` (?), n. [AS. sicolwyrt.] (Bot.) (a) A plant of the genus
Coronilla (C. scorpioides); -- so named from its curved pods. (b) The
healall (Brunella vulgaris).

Sick"lied (?), a. Made sickly. See Sickly, v.

Sick"li*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sickly.

Sick"ly (?), a. [Compar. Sicklier (?); superl. Sickliest.] 1. Somewhat
sick; disposed to illness; attended with disease; as, a sickly body.

    This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.


Shak.

2. Producing, or tending to, disease; as, a sickly autumn; a sickly
climate. Cowper.

3. Appearing as if sick; weak; languid; pale.

    The moon grows sickly at the sight of day.


Dryden.

    Nor torrid summer's sickly smile.


Keble.

4. Tending to produce nausea; sickening; as, a sickly smell; sickly
sentimentality.

Syn. -- Diseased; ailing; infirm; weakly; unhealthy; healthless; weak;
feeble; languid; faint.

Sick"ly, adv. In a sick manner or condition; ill.

    My people sickly [with ill will] beareth our marriage.


Chaucer.

Sick"ly, v. t. To make sick or sickly; -- with over, and probably only
in the past participle. [R.]

    Sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought.


Shak.

    Sentiments sicklied over . . . with that cloying heaviness into
    which unvaried sweetness is too apt to subside.


Jeffrey.

Sick"ness, n. [AS. seócness.] 1. The quality or state of being sick or
diseased; illness; sisease or malady.

    I do lament the sickness of the king.


Shak.

    Trust not too much your now resistless charms; Those, age or
    sickness soon or late disarms.


Pope.

2. Nausea; qualmishness; as, sickness of stomach.

Syn. -- Illness; disease; malady. See Illness.

Si"cle (?), n. [F., fr. L. silcus, Heb. shegel. See Shekel.] A shekel.
[Obs.]

    The holy mother brought five sicles and a pair of turtledoves to
    redeem the Lamb of God.


Jer. Taylor.

||Si"da (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a kind of plant.] (Bot.) A
||genus of malvaceous plants common in the tropics. All the species are
||mucilaginous, and some have tough ligneous fibers which are used as a
||substitute for hemp and flax. Balfour (Cyc. of India).

Sid"dow (?), a. Soft; pulpy. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Side (?), n. [AS. sde; akin to D. zijde, G. seite, OHG. sta, Icel.
s&?;a, Dan. side, Sw. sida; cf. AS. sd large, spacious, Icel. s&?;r
long, hanging.] 1. The margin, edge, verge, or border of a surface;
especially (when the thing spoken of is somewhat oblong in shape), one
of the longer edges as distinguished from the shorter edges, called
ends; a bounding line of a geometrical figure; as, the side of a field,
of a square or triangle, of a river, of a road, etc.

3. Any outer portion of a thing considered apart from, and yet in
relation to, the rest; as, the upper side of a sphere; also, any part
or position viewed as opposite to or contrasted with another; as, this
or that side.

    Looking round on every side beheld A pathless desert.


Milton.

4. (a) One of the halves of the body, of an animals or man, on either
side of the mesial plane; or that which pertains to such a half; as, a
side of beef; a side of sole leather. (b) The right or left part of the
wall or trunk of the body; as, a pain in the side.

    One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side.


John xix. 34.

5. A slope or declivity, as of a hill, considered as opposed to another
slope over the ridge.

    Along the side of yon small hill.


Milton.

6. The position of a person or party regarded as opposed to another
person or party, whether as a rival or a foe; a body of advocates or
partisans; a party; hence, the interest or cause which one maintains
against another; a doctrine or view opposed to another.

    God on our side, doubt not of victory.


Shak.

    We have not always been of the . . . same side in politics.


Landor.

    Sets the passions on the side of truth.


Pope.

7. A line of descent traced through one parent as distinguished from
that traced through another.

    To sit upon thy father David's throne, By mother's side thy father.


Milton.

8. Fig.: Aspect or part regarded as contrasted with some other; as, the
bright side of poverty.

By the side of, close at hand; near to. -- Exterior side. (Fort.) See
Exterior, and Illust. of Ravelin. -- Interior side (Fort.), the line
drawn from the center of one bastion to that of the next, or the line
curtain produced to the two oblique radii in front. H. L. Scott. --
Side by side, close together and abreast; in company or along with. --
To choose sides, to select those who shall compete, as in a game, on
either side. -- To take sides, to attach one's self to, or give
assistance to, one of two opposing sides or parties.

Side (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a side, or the sides; being on the
side, or toward the side; lateral.

    One mighty squadron with a side wind sped.


Dryden.

2. Hence, indirect; oblique; collateral; incidental; as, a side issue;
a side view or remark.

    The law hath no side respect to their persons.


Hooker.

3. [AS. sd. Cf Side, n.] Long; large; extensive. [Obs. or Scot.] Shak.

    His gown had side sleeves down to mid leg.


Laneham.

Side action, in breech-loading firearms, a mechanism for operating the
breech block, which is moved by a lever that turns sidewise. -- Side
arms, weapons worn at the side, as sword, bayonet, pistols, etc. --
Side ax, an ax of which the handle is bent to one side. -- Side-bar
rule (Eng. Law.), a rule authorized by the courts to be granted by
their officers as a matter of course, without formal application being
made to them in open court; -- so called because anciently moved for by
the attorneys at side bar, that is, informally. Burril. -- Side box, a
box or inclosed seat on the side of a theater.

    To insure a side-box station at half price.


Cowper.

-- Side chain, one of two safety chains connecting a tender with a
locomotive, at the sides. -- Side cut, a canal or road branching out
from the main one. [U.S.] -- Side dish, one of the dishes subordinate
to the main course. -- Side glance, a glance or brief look to one side.
-- Side hook (Carp.), a notched piece of wood for clamping a board to
something, as a bench. -- Side lever, a working beam of a side-lever
engine. -- Side-lever engine, a marine steam engine having a working
beam of each side of the cylinder, near the bottom of the engine,
communicating motion to a crank that is above them. -- Side pipe (Steam
Engine), a steam or exhaust pipe connecting the upper and lower steam
chests of the cylinder of a beam engine. -- Side plane, a plane in
which the cutting edge of the iron is at the side of the stock. -- Side
posts (Carp.), posts in a truss, usually placed in pairs, each post set
at the same distance from the middle of the truss, for supporting the
principal rafters, hanging the tiebeam, etc. -- Side rod. (a) One of
the rods which connect the piston-rod crosshead with the side levers,
in a side-lever engine. (b) See Parallel rod, under Parallel. -- Side
screw (Firearms), one of the screws by which the lock is secured to the
side of a firearm stock. -- Side table, a table placed either against
the wall or aside from the principal table. -- Side tool (Mach.), a
cutting tool, used in a lathe or planer, having the cutting edge at the
side instead of at the point. -- Side wind, a wind from one side;
hence, an indirect attack, or indirect means. Wright.

Side, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sided; p. pr.& vb. n. Siding.] 1. To lean on
one side. [Obs.] Bacon.

2. To embrace the opinions of one party, or engage in its interest, in
opposition to another party; to take sides; as, to side with the
ministerial party.

    All side in parties, and begin the attack.


Pope.

Side, v. t. 1. To be or stand at the side of; to be on the side toward.
[Obs.]

    His blind eye that sided Paridell.


Spenser.

2. To suit; to pair; to match. [Obs.] Clarendon.

3. (Shipbuilding) To work (a timber or rib) to a certain thickness by
trimming the sides.

4. To furnish with a siding; as, to side a house.

Side"board` (?), n. A piece of dining-room furniture having
compartments and shelves for keeping or displaying articles of table
service.

    At a stately sideboard, by the wine, That fragrant smell diffused.


Milton.

Side"bone` (?), n. (Far.) A morbid growth or deposit of bony matter and
at the sides of the coronet and coffin bone of a horse. J. H. Walsh.

Sid"ed (?), a. Having (such or so many) sides; -- used in composition;
as, one-sided; many- sided.

Side"hill` (?), n. The side or slope of a hill; sloping ground; a
descent. [U. S.]

Side"ling (?), adv. [OE. sideling, fr. side side. See Side, and cf.
Sidelong, Headlong.] Sidelong; on the side; laterally; also, obliquely;
askew.

    A fellow nailed up maps . . . some sideling, and others upside
    down.


Swift.

Side"ling, a. Inclining to one side; directed toward one side; sloping;
inclined; as, sideling ground.

Side"long` (?), adv. [See Sideling, adv.] 1. Laterally; obliquely; in
the direction of the side.

2. On the side; as, to lay a thing sidelong. [See Sideling, adv. ]
Evelyn.

Side"long`, a. Lateral; oblique; not being directly in front; as, a
sidelong glance.

    The bashful virgin's sidelong looks of love.


Goldsmith.

Side"piece` (?), n. (Joinery) The jamb, or cheek, of an opening in a
wall, as of door or window.

Sid"er (?), n. One who takes a side.

Si"der (?), n. Cider. [Obs.]

Sid"er*al (?), a. [L. sideralis. See Sidereal.] 1. Relating to the
stars.

2. (Astrol.) Affecting unfavorably by the supposed influence of the
stars; baleful. "Sideral blast." Milton.

Sid"er*a`ted (?), a. [L. sideratus, p. p. of siderari to be blasted by
a constellation, fr. sidus, sideris, a constellation.] Planet-struck;
blasted. [Obs.]

Sid`er*a"tion, n. [L. sideratio.] The state of being siderated, or
planet-struck; esp., blast in plants; also, a sudden and apparently
causeless stroke of disease, as in apoplexy or paralysis. [Obs.] Ray.

Si*de"re*al (?), a. [L. sidereus, from sidus, sideris, a constellation,
a star. Cf. Sideral, Consider, Desire.] 1. Relating to the stars;
starry; astral; as, sidereal astronomy.

2. (Astron.) Measuring by the apparent motion of the stars; designated,
marked out, or accompanied, by a return to the same position in respect
to the stars; as, the sidereal revolution of a planet; a sidereal day.

Sidereal clock, day, month, year. See under Clock, Day, etc. -- Sideral
time, time as reckoned by sideral days, or, taking the sidereal day as
the unit, the time elapsed since a transit of the vernal equinox,
reckoned in parts of a sidereal day. This is, strictly, apparent
sidereal time, mean sidereal time being reckoned from the transit, not
of the true, but of the mean, equinoctial point.

Si*de"re*al*ize (?), v. t. To elevate to the stars, or to the region of
the stars; to etherealize.

    German literature transformed, siderealized, as we see it in
    Goethe, reckons Winckelmann among its initiators.


W. Pater.

Si*de"re*ous (?), a. [L. sidereus.] Sidereal. [Obs.]

Sid"er*ite, n. [L. sideritis loadstone, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;&?;,
of iron, from &?;&?;&?;&?; iron.] 1. (Min.) (a) Carbonate of iron, an
important ore of iron occuring generally in cleavable masses, but also
in rhombohedral crystals. It is of a light yellowish brown color.
Called also sparry iron, spathic iron. (b) A meteorite consisting
solely of metallic iron. (c) An indigo-blue variety of quartz. (d)
Formerly, magnetic iron ore, or loadstone.

2. (Bot.) Any plant of the genus Sideritis; ironwort.

{ Sid`er*o*graph"ic (?), Sid`er*o*graph"ic*al (?), } a. Of or
pertaining to siderography; executed by engraved plates of steel; as,
siderographic art; siderographic impressions.

Sid`er*og"ra*phist (?), n. One skilled in siderography.

Sid`er*og"ra*phy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; iron + -graphy.] The art or
practice of steel engraving; especially, the process, invented by
Perkins, of multiplying facsimiles of an engraved steel plate by first
rolling over it, when hardened, a soft steel cylinder, and then rolling
the cylinder, when hardened, over a soft steel plate, which thus
becomes a facsimile of the original. The process has been superseded by
electrotypy.

Sid"er*o*lite (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; iron + -lite.] A kind of
meteorite. See under Meteorite.

Sid"er*o*man`cy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; iron + -mancy.] Divination by
burning straws on red-hot iron, and noting the manner of their burning.
Craig.

Sid"er*o*scope (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; iron + -scope.] An instrument for
detecting small quantities of iron in any substance by means of a very
delicate combination of magnetic needles.

||Sid`e*ro"sis (?), n.[NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; iron.] (Med.) A sort of
||pneumonia occuring in iron workers, produced by the inhalation of
||particles of iron.

Sid"er*o*stat (?), n. [L. sidus, sideris, a star + Gr. &?;&?;&?;
standing, fixed, fr. &?;&?;&?;&?; to place.] (Astron.) An apparatus
consisting essentially of a mirror moved by clockwork so as to throw
the rays of the sun or a star in a fixed direction; -- a more general
term for heliostat.

||Sid`e*rox"y*lon (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; iron + &?;&?;&?;
||wood.] (Bot.) A genus of tropical sapotaceous trees noted for their
||very hard wood; ironwood.

Side"sad`dle (?), n. A saddle for women, in which the rider sits with
both feet on one side of the animal mounted.

Sidesaddle flower (Bot.), a plant with hollow leaves and curiously
shaped flowers; -- called also huntsman's cup. See Sarracenia.

<! p. 1338 !>

Sides"man (?), n.; pl. Sidesmen (&?;). 1. A party man; a partisan.
Milton.

2. An assistant to the churchwarden; a questman.

Side"-tak`ing (?), n. A taking sides, as with a party, sect, or
faction. Bp. Hall.

Side"walk` (?), n. A walk for foot passengers at the side of a street
or road; a foot pavement. [U.S.]

Side"ways` (?), adv. Toward the side; sidewise.

    A second refraction made sideways.


Sir I. Newton.

    His beard, a good palm's length, at least, . . . Shot sideways,
    like a swallow's wings.


Longfellow.

Side"-wheel`, a. Having a paddle wheel on each side; -- said of steam
vessels; as, a side-wheel steamer.

Side"wind`er (?), n. 1. (Zoöl.) See Horned rattler, under Horned.

2. A heavy swinging blow from the side, which disables an adversary.
[Slang.] Side"wise` (?), adv. On or toward one side; laterally;
sideways.

    I saw them mask their awful glance Sidewise meek in gossamer lids.


Emerson.

Sid"ing (?), n. 1. Attaching one's self to a party.

2. A side track, as a railroad; a turnout.

3. (Carp.) The covering of the outside wall of a frame house, whether
made of weatherboards, vertical boarding with cleats, shingles, or the
like.

4. (Shipbuilding) The thickness of a rib or timber, measured, at right
angles with its side, across the curved edge; as, a timber having a
siding of ten inches.

Si"dle (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sidled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sidling
(?).] [From Side.] To go or move with one side foremost; to move
sidewise; as, to sidle through a crowd or narrow opening. Swift.

    He . . . then sidled close to the astonished girl.


Sir W. Scott.

Siege (?), n. [OE. sege, OF. siege, F. siège a seat, a siege; cf. It.
seggia, seggio, zedio, a seat, asseggio, assedio, a siege, F. assiéger
to besiege, It. & LL. assediare, L. obsidium a siege, besieging; all
ultimately fr. L. sedere to sit. See Sit, and cf. See, n.] 1. A seat;
especially, a royal seat; a throne. [Obs.] "Upon the very siege of
justice." Shak.

    A stately siege of sovereign majesty, And thereon sat a woman
    gorgeous gay.


Spenser.

    In our great hall there stood a vacant chair . . . And Merlin
    called it "The siege perilous."


Tennyson.

2. Hence, place or situation; seat. [Obs.]

    Ah! traitorous eyes, come out of your shameless siege forever.


Painter (Palace of Pleasure).

3. Rank; grade; station; estimation. [Obs.]

    I fetch my life and being From men of royal siege.


Shak.

4. Passage of excrements; stool; fecal matter. [Obs.]

    The siege of this mooncalf.


Shak.

5. The sitting of an army around or before a fortified place for the
purpose of compelling the garrison to surrender; the surrounding or
investing of a place by an army, and approaching it by passages and
advanced works, which cover the besiegers from the enemy's fire. See
the Note under Blockade.

6. Hence, a continued attempt to gain possession.

    Love stood the siege, and would not yield his breast.


Dryden.

7. The floor of a glass-furnace.

8. A workman's bench. Knught.

Siege gun, a heavy gun for siege operations. -- Siege train, artillery
adapted for attacking fortified places.

Siege, v. t. To besiege; to beset. [R.]

    Through all the dangers that can siege The life of man.


Buron.

Siege"work` (?), n. A temporary fort or parallel where siege guns are
mounted.

Sie"mens-Mar`tin proc"ess (?). See Open-hearth process, etc., under
Open.

Si"e*nite (?), n. (Min.) See Syenite.

Si`e*nit"ic (?), a. See Syenitic.

Si*en"na (?), n. [It. terra di Siena, fr. Siena in Italy.] (Chem.) Clay
that is colored red or brown by the oxides of iron or manganese, and
used as a pigment. It is used either in the raw state or burnt.

Burnt sienna, sienna made of a much redder color by the action of fire.
-- Raw sienna, sienna in its natural state, of a transparent yellowish
brown color.

Si`en*nese" (?), a. Of or pertaining to Sienna, a city of Italy.

||Si*er"ra (?), n. [Sp., properly, a saw, fr. L. serra a saw. See
||Serrate.] A ridge of mountain and craggy rocks, with a serrated or
||irregular outline; as, the Sierra Nevada.

    The wild sierra overhead.


Whitter.

||Si*es"ta (?), n. [Sp., probably fr. L. sessitare to sit much or long,
||v. freq. of sedere, sessum, to sit. See Sit.] A short sleep taken
||about the middle of the day, or after dinner; a midday nap.

||Sieur (?), n. [F., abbrev. from seigneur. Cf. Monsieur, Seignior.]
||Sir; -- a title of respect used by the French.

Sie"va (?), n. (Bot.) A small variety of the Lima bean (Phaseolus
lunatus).

Sieve (?), n. [OE. sive, AS. sife; akin to D. zeef, zift, OHG. sib, G.
sieb. &radic;151a. Cf. Sift.] 1. A utensil for separating the finer and
coarser parts of a pulverized or granulated substance from each other.
It consist of a vessel, usually shallow, with the bottom perforated, or
made of hair, wire, or the like, woven in meshes. "In a sieve thrown
and sifted." Chaucer.

2. A kind of coarse basket. Simmonds.

Sieve cells (Bot.), cribriform cells. See under Cribriform.

Si"fac (?), n. (Zoöl.) The white indris of Madagascar. It is regarded
by the natives as sacred.

Sif"fle*ment (?), n. [F., a whistling or hissing.] The act of whistling
or hissing; a whistling sound; sibilation. [Obs.] A. Brewer.

Sif"i*let (?), n. [Cf. F. siflet.] (Zoöl.) The six-shafted bird of
paradise. See Paradise bird, under Paradise.

Sift (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sifted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sifting.] [AS.
siftan, from sife sieve. &radic;151a. See Sieve.] 1. To separate with a
sieve, as the fine part of a substance from the coarse; as, to sift
meal or flour; to sift powder; to sift sand or lime.

2. To separate or part as if with a sieve.

    When yellow sands are sifted from below, The glittering billows
    give a golden show.


Dryden.

3. To examine critically or minutely; to scrutinize.

    Sifting the very utmost sentence and syllable.


Hooker.

    Opportunity I here have had To try thee, sift thee.


Milton.

    Let him but narrowly sift his ideas.


I. Taylor.

To sift out, to search out with care, as if by sifting.

Sift"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, sifts.

2. (Zoöl.) Any lamellirostral bird, as a duck or goose; -- so called
because it sifts or strains its food from the water and mud by means of
the lamell&?; of the beak.

Sig (?), n. [Akin to AS. sgan to fall. &radic;151a. See Sink, v. t.]
Urine. [Prov. Eng.]

Si*gaul"ti*an (?), a. (Surg.) Pertaining to Sigault, a French
physician. See Symphyseotomy.

Sig"ger, v. i. Same as Sicker. [Prov. Eng.]

Sigh (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sighed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sighing.]
[OE. sighen, si&?;en; cf. also OE. siken, AS. scan, and OE. sighten,
si&?;ten, sichten, AS. siccettan; all, perhaps, of imitative origin.]
1. To inhale a larger quantity of air than usual, and immediately expel
it; to make a deep single audible respiration, especially as the result
or involuntary expression of fatigue, exhaustion, grief, sorrow, or the
like.

2. Hence, to lament; to grieve.

    He sighed deeply in his spirit.


Mark viii. 12.

3. To make a sound like sighing.

    And the coming wind did roar more loud, And the sails did sigh like
    sedge.


Coleridge.

    The winter winds are wearily sighing.


Tennyson.

An extraordinary pronunciation of this word as sth is still heard in
England and among the illiterate in the United States.

Sigh, v. t. 1. To exhale (the breath) in sighs.

    Never man sighed truer breath.


Shak.

2. To utter sighs over; to lament or mourn over.

    Ages to come, and men unborn, Shall bless her name, and sigh her
    fate.


Pior.

3. To express by sighs; to utter in or with sighs.

    They . . . sighed forth proverbs.


Shak.

    The gentle swain . . . sighs back her grief.


Hoole.

Sigh, n. [OE. sigh; cf. OE. sik. See Sigh, v. i.] 1. A deep and
prolonged audible inspiration or respiration of air, as when fatigued
or grieved; the act of sighing.

    I could drive the boat with my sighs.


Shak.

2. Figuratively, a manifestation of grief; a lan&?;ent.

    With their sighs the air Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite.


Milton.

Sigh"-born` (?), a. Sorrowful; mournful. [R.] "Sigh-born thoughts." De
Quincey.

Sigh"er (?), n. One who sighs.

Sigh"ing, a. Uttering sighs; grieving; lamenting. "Sighing millions."
Cowper. - - Sigh"ing*ly, adv.

Sight (?), n. [OE. sight, si&?;t, siht, AS. siht, gesiht, gesih&?;,
gesieh&?;, gesyh&?;; akin to D. gezicht, G. sicht, gesicht, Dan. sigte,
Sw. sigt, from the root of E. see. See See, v. t.] 1. The act of
seeing; perception of objects by the eye; view; as, to gain sight of
land.

    A cloud received him out of their sight.


Acts. i. 9.

2. The power of seeing; the faculty of vision, or of perceiving objects
by the instrumentality of the eyes.

    Thy sight is young, And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.


Shak.

    O loss of sight, of thee I most complain!


Milton.

3. The state of admitting unobstructed vision; visibility; open view;
region which the eye at one time surveys; space through which the power
of vision extends; as, an object within sight.

4. A spectacle; a view; a show; something worth seeing.

    Moses said, I will now turn aside and see this great sight, why the
    bush is not burnt.


Ex. iii. 3.

    They never saw a sight so fair.


Spenser.

5. The instrument of seeing; the eye.

    Why cloud they not their sights?


Shak.

6. Inspection; examination; as, a letter intended for the sight of only
one person.

7. Mental view; opinion; judgment; as, in their sight it was harmless.
Wake.

    That which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight
    of God.


Luke xvi. 15.

8. A small aperture through which objects are to be seen, and by which
their direction is settled or ascertained; as, the sight of a quadrant.

    Thier eyes of fire sparking through sights of steel.


Shak.

9. A small piece of metal, fixed or movable, on the breech, muzzle,
center, or trunnion of a gun, or on the breech and the muzzle of a
rifle, pistol, etc., by means of which the eye is guided in aiming.
Farrow.

10. In a drawing, picture, etc., that part of the surface, as of paper
or canvas, which is within the frame or the border or margin. In a
frame or the like, the open space, the opening.

11. A great number, quantity, or sum; as, a sight of money. [Now
colloquial]

Sight in this last sense was formerly employed in the best usage. "A
sight of lawyers." Latimer.

    A wonder sight of flowers.


Gower.

At sight, as soon as seen, or presented to sight; as, a draft payable
at sight: to read Greek at sight; to shoot a person at sight. -- Front
sight (Firearms), the sioht nearost the ouzzle. -- Open sight.
(Firearms) (a) A front sight through which the objects aimed at may be
seen, in distinction from one that hides the object. (b) A rear sight
having an open notch instead of an aperture. -- Peep sight, Rear sight.
See under Peep, and Rear. -- Sight draft, an order, or bill of
exchange, directing the payment of money at sight. -- To take sight, to
take aim; to look for the purpose of directing a piece of artillery, or
the like.

Syn. -- Vision; view; show; spectacle; representation; exhibition.

Sight (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sighted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sighting.] 1.
To get sight of; to see; as, to sight land; to sight a wreck. Kane.

2. To look at through a sight; to see accurately; as, to sight an
object, as a star.

3. To apply sights to; to adjust the sights of; also, to give the
proper elevation and direction to by means of a sight; as, to sight a
rifle or a cannon.

Sight, v. i. (Mil.) To take aim by a sight.

Sight"ed, a. Having sight, or seeing, in a particular manner; -- used
in composition; as, long- sighted, short-sighted, quick-sighted, sharp-
sighted, and the like.

Sight"ful (?), a. Easily or clearly seen; distinctly visible;
perspicuous. [Obs.] Testament of Love.

Sight"ful*ness, n. The state of being sightful; perspicuity. [Obs.] Sir
P. Sidney.

Sight"-hole` (?), n. A hole for looking through; a peephole. "Stop all
sight-holes." Shak.

Sight"ing, a. & n. from Sight, v. t.

Sighting shot, a shot made to ascertain whether the sights of a firearm
are properly adjusted; a trial shot.

Sight"less, a. 1. Wanting sight; without sight; blind.

    Of all who blindly creep or sightless soar.


Pope.

2. That can not be seen; invisible. [Obs.]

    The sightless couriers of the air.


Shak.

3. Offensive or unpleasing to the eye; unsightly; as, sightless stains.
[R.] Shak.

-- Sight"less*ly, adv.- Sight"less*ness, n.

Sight"li*ness (?), n. The state of being sightly; comeliness;
conspicuousness.

Sight"ly (?), a. 1. Pleasing to the sight; comely. "Many brave, sightly
horses." L'Estrange.

2. Open to sight; conspicuous; as, a house stands in a sightly place.

Sight"proof` (?), a. Undiscoverable to sight.

    Hidden in their own sightproof bush.


Lowell.

Sight"-see`ing (?), a. Engaged in, or given to, seeing sights; eager
for novelties or curiosities.

Sight"-see`ing, n. The act of seeing sights; eagerness for novelties or
curiosities.

Sight"-se`er (?), n. One given to seeing sights or noted things, or
eager for novelties or curiosities.

Sight"-shot` (?), n. Distance to which the sight can reach or be
thrown. [R.] Cowley.

Sights"man (?), n.; pl. Sightsmen (&?;). (Mus.) One who reads or
performs music readily at first sight. [R.] Busby.

Sig"il (?), n. [L. sigillum. See Seal a stamp.] A seal; a signature.
Dryden.

    Of talismans and sigils knew the power.


Pope.

||Sig`il*la"ri*a (?), n. pl. [L., from sigillum a seal. See Sigil.]
||(Rom. Antic.) Little images or figures of earthenware exposed for
||sale, or given as presents, on the last two days of the Saturnalia;
||hence, the last two, or the sixth and seventh, days of the
||Saturnalia.

||Sig`il*la"ri*a, n. [NL., fem sing. fr. L. sigillum a seal.] (Paleon.)
||A genus of fossil trees principally found in the coal formation; --
||so named from the seallike leaf scars in vertical rows on the
||surface.

Sig`il*la"rid (?), n. (Paleon.) One of an extinct family of
cryptagamous trees, including the genus Sigillaria and its allies.

Sig"il*la`ted (?), a. [L. sigillatus adorned with little images.]
Decorated by means of stamps; -- said of pottery.

Sig"il*la*tive (?), a. [L. sigillum a seal: cf. OF. sigillatif.] Fit to
seal; belonging to a seal; composed of wax. [R.]

||Si*gil"lum (?), n.; pl. Sigilla (#). [L.] (Rom. & Old Eng. Law) A
||seal.

||Sig"la (?), n. pl. [L.] The signs, abbreviations, letters, or
||characters standing for words, shorthand, etc., in ancient
||manuscripts, or on coins, medals, etc. W. Savage.

||Sig"ma (?), n.; pl. Sigmas (#). [L., from Gr. &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;.]
||The Greek letter , &sigma;, or (English S, or s). It originally had
||the form of the English C.

Sig"mo*dont (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; sigma (&?;) + &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;,
a tooth.] (Zoöl.) Any one of a tribe (Sigmodontes) of rodents which
includes all the indigenous rats and mice of America. So called from
the form of the ridges of enamel on the crowns of the worn molars. Also
used adjectively.

{ Sig"moid (?), Sig*moid"al (?), } a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;; &?;&?;&?; sigma +
&?;&?;&?; form, likeness: cf. F. sigmoïde.] Curved in two directions,
like the letter S, or the Greek .

Sigmoid flexure (Anat.), the last curve of the colon before it
terminates in the rectum. See Illust. under Digestive. -- Sigmoid
valves. (Anat.) See Semilunar valves, under Semilunar.

Sig*moid"al*ly, adv. In a sigmoidal manner.

<! p. 1339 !>

Sign (?), n. [F. signe, L. signum; cf. AS. segen, segn, a sign,
standard, banner, also fr. L. signum. Cf. Ensign, Resign, Seal a stamp,
Signal, Signet.] That by which anything is made known or represented;
that which furnishes evidence; a mark; a token; an indication; a proof.
Specifically: (a) A remarkable event, considered by the ancients as
indicating the will of some deity; a prodigy; an omen. (b) An event
considered by the Jews as indicating the divine will, or as manifesting
an interposition of the divine power for some special end; a miracle; a
wonder.

    Through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of the Spirit of
    God.


Rom. xv. 19.

    It shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither
    hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the
    voice of the latter sign.


Ex. iv. 8.

(c) Something serving to indicate the existence, or preserve the
memory, of a thing; a token; a memorial; a monument.

    What time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they
    became a sign.


Num. xxvi. 10.

(d) Any symbol or emblem which prefigures, typifles, or represents, an
idea; a type; hence, sometimes, a picture.

    The holy symbols, or signs, are not barely significative; but what
    they represent is as certainly delivered to us as the symbols
    themselves.


Brerewood.

    Saint George of Merry England, the sign of victory.


Spenser.

(e) A word or a character regarded as the outward manifestation of
thought; as, words are the sign of ideas. (f) A motion, an action, or a
gesture by which a thought is expressed, or a command or a wish made
known.

    They made signs to his father, how he would have him called.


Luke i. 62.

(g) Hence, one of the gestures of pantomime, or of a language of a
signs such as those used by the North American Indians, or those used
by the deaf and dumb.

Educaters of the deaf distinguish between natural signs, which serve
for communicating ideas, and methodical, or systematic, signs, adapted
for the dictation, or the rendering, of written language, word by word;
and thus the signs are to be distinguished from the manual alphabet, by
which words are spelled on the fingers.

(h) A military emblem carried on a banner or a standard. Milton. (i) A
lettered board, or other conspicuous notice, placed upon or before a
building, room, shop, or office to advertise the business there
transacted, or the name of the person or firm carrying it on; a
publicly displayed token or notice.

    The shops were, therefore, distinguished by painted signs, which
    gave a gay and grotesque aspect to the streets.


Macaulay.

(j) (Astron.) The twelfth part of the ecliptic or zodiac.

The signs are reckoned from the point of intersection of the ecliptic
and equator at the vernal equinox, and are named, respectively, Aries
(), Taurus (), Gemini (II), Cancer (), Leo (), Virgo (), Libra (),
Scorpio (), Sagittarius (), Capricornus  (), Aquarius (), Pisces ().
These names were originally the names of the constellations occupying
severally the divisions of the zodiac, by which they are still
retained; but, in consequence of the procession of the equinoxes, the
signs have, in process of time, become separated about 30 degrees from
these constellations, and each of the latter now lies in the sign next
in advance, or to the east of the one which bears its name, as the
constellation Aries in the sign Taurus, etc.

(k) (Alg.) A character indicating the relation of quantities, or an
operation performed upon them; as, the sign + (plus); the sign --
(minus); the sign of division ÷, and the like. (l) (Med.) An objective
evidence of disease; that is, one appreciable by some one other than
the patient.

The terms symptom and and sign are often used synonymously; but they
may be discriminated. A sign differs from a symptom in that the latter
is perceived only by the patient himself. The term sign is often
further restricted to the purely local evidences of disease afforded by
direct examination of the organs involved, as distinguished from those
evidence of general disturbance afforded by observation of the
temperature, pulse, etc. In this sense it is often called physical
sign.

(m) (Mus.) Any character, as a flat, sharp, dot, etc. (n) (Theol.) That
which, being external, stands for, or signifies, something internal or
spiritual; -- a term used in the Church of England in speaking of an
ordinance considered with reference to that which it represents.

    An outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace.


Bk. of Common Prayer.

See the Table of Arbitrary Signs, p. 1924.

Sign manual. (a) (Eng. Law) The royal signature superscribed at the top
of bills of grants and letter patent, which are then sealed with the
privy signet or great seal, as the case may be, to complete their
validity. (b) The signature of one's name in one's own handwriting.
Craig. Tomlins. Wharton.

Syn. -- Token; mark; note; symptom; indication; signal; symbol; type;
omen; prognostic; presage; manifestation. See Emblem.

Sign (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Signed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Signing.]
[OE. seinen to bless, originally, to make the sign of the cross over;
in this sense fr. ASS. segnian (from segn, n.), or OF. seignier, F.
signer, to mark, to sign (in sense 3), fr. L. signare to mark, set a
mark upon, from signum. See Sign, n.] 1. To represent by a sign; to
make known in a typical or emblematic manner, in distinction from
speech; to signify.

    I signed to Browne to make his retreat.


Sir W. Scott.

2. To make a sign upon; to mark with a sign.

    We receive this child into the congregation of Christ's flock, and
    do sign him with the sign of the cross.


Bk. of Com Prayer.

3. To affix a signature to; to ratify by hand or seal; to subscribe in
one's own handwriting.

    Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed, And let him sign
    it.


Shak.

4. To assign or convey formally; -- used with away.

5. To mark; to make distinguishable. Shak.

Sign (?), v. i. 1. To be a sign or omen. [Obs.] Shak.

2. To make a sign or signal; to communicate directions or intelligence
by signs.

3. To write one's name, esp. as a token of assent, responsibility, or
obligation.

Sign"a*ble (?), a. Suitable to be signed; requiring signature; as, a
legal document signable by a particular person.

Sig"nal (?), n. [F., fr. LL. signale, fr. L. signum. See Sign, n.] 1. A
sign made for the purpose of giving notice to a person of some
occurence, command, or danger; also, a sign, event, or watchword, which
has been agreed upon as the occasion of concerted action.

    All obeyed The wonted signal and superior voice Of this great
    potentate.


Milton.

2. A token; an indication; a foreshadowing; a sign.

    The weary sun . . . Gives signal of a goodly day to-morrow.


Shak.

    There was not the least signal of the calamity to be seen.


De Foc.

Sig"nal, a. [From signal, n.: cf. F. signalé.] 1. Noticeable;
distinguished from what is ordinary; eminent; remarkable; memorable;
as, a signal exploit; a signal service; a signal act of benevolence.

    As signal now in low, dejected state As erst in highest, behold him
    where he lies.


Milton.

2. Of or pertaining to signals, or the use of signals in conveying
information; as, a signal flag or officer.

The signal service, a bureau of the government (in the United States
connected with the War Department) organized to collect from the whole
country simultaneous raports of local meteorological conditions, upon
comparison of which at the central office, predictions concerning the
weather are telegraphed to various sections, where they are made known
by signals publicly displayed. -- Signal station, the place where a
signal is displayed; specifically, an observation office of the signal
service.

Syn. -- Eminent; remarkable; memorable; extraordinary; notable;
conspicuous.

Sig"nal, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Signaled (&?;) or Signalled; p. pr. & vb.
n. Signaling or Signalling.] 1. To communicate by signals; as, to
signal orders.

2. To notify by a signals; to make a signal or signals to; as, to
signal a fleet to anchor. M. Arnold.

Sig"nal*ist, n. One who makes signals; one who communicates
intelligence by means of signals.

Sig*nal"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being signal or
remarkable. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sig"nal*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Signalized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Signalizing (?).] [From Signal, a.] 1. To make signal or eminent; to
render distinguished from what is common; to distinguish.

    It is this passion which drives men to all the ways we see in use
    of signalizing themselves.


Burke.

2. To communicate with by means of a signal; as, a ship signalizes its
consort.

3. To indicate the existence, presence, or fact of, by a signal; as, to
signalize the arrival of a steamer.

Sig"nal*ly, adv. In a signal manner; eminently.

Sig"nal*man (?), n.; pl. -men (&?;). A man whose business is to manage
or display signals; especially, one employed in setting the signals by
which railroad trains are run or warned.

Sig"nal*ment (?), n. The act of signaling, or of signalizing; hence,
description by peculiar, appropriate, or characteristic marks. Mrs.
Browning.

Sig"nate (?), a. [L. signatus, p. p. See Sign, v. t.] (Zoöl.) Having
definite color markings.

Sig*na"tion (?), n. [L. signatio. See Sign, v. t.] Sign given; marking.
[Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sig"na*to*ry (?), a. [L. signatorius.] 1. Relating to a seal; used in
sealing. [Obs.] Bailey.

2. Signing; joining or sharing in a signature; as, signatory powers.

Sig"na*to*ry, n.; pl. - ries (&?;). A signer; one who signs or
subscribes; as, a conference of signatories.

Sig"na*ture (?), n. [F. (cf. It. signatura, segnatura, Sp. & LL.
signatura), from L. signare, signatum. See Sign, v. t.] 1. A sign,
stamp, or mark impressed, as by a seal.

    The brain, being well furnished with various traces, signatures,
    and images.


I. Watts.

    The natural and indelible signature of God, which human souls . . .
    are supposed to be stamped with.


Bentley.

2. Especially, the name of any person, written with his own hand,
employed to signify that the writing which precedes accords with his
wishes or intentions; a sign manual; an autograph.

3. (Physiol.) An outward mark by which internal characteristics were
supposed to be indicated.

    Some plants bear a very evident signature of their nature and use.


Dr. H. More.

4. (Old Med.) A resemblance between the external characters of a
disease and those of some physical agent, for instance, that existing
between the red skin of scarlet fever and a red cloth; -- supposed to
indicate this agent in the treatment of the disease.

5. (Mus.) The designation of the key (when not C major, or its
relative, A minor) by means of one or more sharps or flats at the
beginning of the staff, immediately after the clef, affecting all notes
of the same letter throughout the piece or movement. Each minor key has
the same signature as its relative major.

6. (Print.) (a) A letter or figure placed at the bottom of the first
page of each sheet of a book or pamphlet, as a direction to the binder
in arranging and folding the sheets. (b) The printed sheet so marked,
or the form from which it is printed; as, to reprint one or more
signatures.

Star signatures (as A*, 1*) are the same characters, with the addition
of asterisks, used on the first pages of offcuts, as in 12mo sheets.

7. (Pharm.) That part of a prescription which contains the directions
to the patient. It is usually prefaced by S or Sig. (an abbreviation
for the Latin signa, imperative of signare to sign or mark).

Sig"na*ture (?), v. t. To mark with, or as with, a signature or
signatures.

Sig"na*tur`ist (?), n. One who holds to the doctrine of signatures
impressed upon objects, indicative of character or qualities. [Obs.]
Sir T. Browne.

Sign"board` (?), n. A board, placed on or before a shop, office, etc.,
on which ssome notice is given, as the name of a firm, of a business,
or the like.

Sign"er (?), n. One who signs or subscribes his name; as, a memorial
with a hundred signers.

Sig"net (?), n. [OF. signet a signet, F., a bookmark, dim. of signe.
See Sign, n., and cf. Sennet.] A seal; especially, in England, the seal
used by the sovereign in sealing private letters and grants that pass
by bill under the sign manual; -- called also privy signet.

    I had my father's signet in my purse.


Shak.

Signet ring, a ring containing a signet or private seal. -- Writer to
the signet (Scots Law), a judicial officer who prepares warrants,
writs, etc.; originally, a clerk in the office of the secretary of
state.

Sig"net*ed, a. Stamped or marked with a signet.

Sig"ni*fer (?), a. [L., from signum sign + ferre to bear.] Bearing
signs. [Obs.] "The signifer sphere, or zodiac." Holland.

{ Sig*nif"i*cance (?), Sig*nif"i*can*cy (?) }, n. [L. significantia.]
1. The quality or state of being significant.

2. That which is signified; meaning; import; as, the significance of a
nod, of a motion of the hand, or of a word or expression.

3. Importance; moment; weight; consequence.

    With this brain I must work, in order to give significancy and
    value to the few facts which I possess.


De Quincey.

Sig*nif"i*cant (?), a. [L. significans, -antis, p. pr. of significare.
See Signify.] 1. Fitted or designed to signify or make known somethingl
having a meaning; standing as a sign or token; expressive or
suggestive; as, a significant word or sound; a significant look.

    It was well said of Plotinus, that the stars were significant, but
    not efficient.


Sir W. Raleigh.

2. Deserving to be considered; important; momentous; as, a significant
event.

Significant figures (Arith.), the figures which remain to any number,
or decimal fraction, after the ciphers at the right or left are
canceled. Thus, the significant figures of 25,000, or of .0025, are 25.

Sig*nif"i*cant, n. That which has significance; a sign; a token; a
symbol. Wordsworth.

    In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts.


Shak.

Sig*nif"i*cant*ly, adv. In a significant manner.

Sig*nif"i*cate (?), n. [L. significatus, p. p. of significare. See
Signify.] (Logic) One of several things signified by a common term.
Whately.

Sig`ni*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [F. signification, L. significatio.] 1. The
act of signifying; a making known by signs or other means.

    A signification of being pleased.


Landor.

    All speaking or signification of one's mind implies an act or
    addres of one man to another.


South.

2. That which is signified or made known; that meaning which a sign,
character, or token is intended to convey; as, the signification of
words.

Sig*nif"i*ca*tive (?), a. [L. significativus: cf. F. significatif.] 1.
Betokening or representing by an external sign.

    The holy symbols or signs are not barely significative.


Brerewood.

2. Having signification or meaning; expressive of a meaning or purpose;
significant.

    Neither in the degrees of kindred they were destitute of
    significative words.


Camden.

-- Sig*nif"i*ca*tive*ly, adv. -- Sig*nif"i*ca*tive*ness, n.

Sig"ni*fi*ca`tor (?), n. [Cf. F. significateur.] One who, or that
which, signifies.

    In this diagram there was one significator which pressed remarkably
    upon our astrologer's attention.


Sir W. Scott.

Sig*nif"i*ca*to*ry (?), a. [L. significatorius.] Significant. -- n.
That which is significatory.

||Sig`ni*fi*ca"vit (?), n. [L., (he) has signified, perf. ind. of
||significare to signify.] (Eng. Eccl. Law) Formerly, a writ issuing
||out of chancery, upon certificate given by the ordinary, of a man's
||standing excommunicate by the space of forty days, for the laying him
||up in prison till he submit himself to the authority of the church.
||Crabb.

Sig"ni*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Signified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Signifying (?).] [F. signifier, L. significare; signum a sign + -ficare
(in comp.) to make. See Sign, n., and -fy.] 1. To show by a sign; to
communicate by any conventional token, as words, gestures, signals, or
the like; to announce; to make known; to declare; to express; as, a
signified his desire to be present.

    I 'll to the king; and signify to him That thus I have resign'd my
    charge to you.


Shak.

    The government should signify to the Protestants of Ireland that
    want of silver is not to be remedied.


Swift.

2. To mean; to import; to denote; to betoken.

    He bade her tell him what it signified.


Chaucer.

    A tale Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, Signifying
    nothing.


Shak.

Signify is often used impersonally; as, it signifies nothing, it does
not signify, that is, it is of no importance.

Syn. -- To express; manifest; declare; utter; intimate; betoken;
denote; imply; mean.

Sign"ior (?), n. Sir; Mr. The English form and pronunciation for the
Italian Signor and the Spanish Señor.

Sign"ior*ize (?), v. t. [See Seigniorize.] To exercise dominion over;
to lord it over. [Obs.] Shelton.

<! p. 1340 !>

Sign"ior*ize (sn"yr*z), v. i. To exercise dominion; to seigniorize.
[Obs.] Hewyt.

Sign"ior*ship, n. State or position of a signior.

Sign"ior*y (-), n. Same as Seigniory.

{ ||Si*gnor" (?), ||Si*gno"re (?) }, n. [It. See Seignior.] Sir; Mr.;
-- a title of address or respect among the Italians. Before a noun the
form is Signor.

||Si*gno"ra (?), n. [It.] Madam; Mrs; -- a title of address or respect
||among the Italians.

||Si`gno*ri"na (?), n. [It.] Miss; -- a title of address among the
||Italians.

Sign"post` (?), n. A post on which a sign hangs, or on which papers are
placed to give public notice of anything.

{ Sik (?), Sike (?), } a. Such. See Such. [Obs.] "Sike fancies weren
foolerie." Spenser.

Sike (?), n. [AS. sc. Cf. Sig.] A gutter; a stream, such as is usually
dry in summer. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Sike, n. [See Sick.] A sick person. [Prov. Eng.]

Sike, v. i. To sigh. [Obs.]

    That for his wife weepeth and siketh sore.


Chaucer.

Sike, n. A sigh. [Obs.] Chaucer.

{ Sik"er (?), a. & adv., Sik"er*ly, adv., Sik"er*ness, n., etc.} See 2d
Sicker, Sickerly, etc. [Obs.]

Sikhs (?), n. pl.; sing. Sikh (&?;). [Hind. Sikh, properly, a
disciple.] A religious sect noted for warlike traits, founded in the
Punjab at the end of the 15th century.

Si"lage (?), n. & v. Short for Ensilage.

Sile (?), v. t. [Akin to Sw. sila to strain, sil sieve, G. sielen to
draw away or lead off water. &radic;151a. See Silt.] To strain, as
fresh milk. [Prov. Eng.]

Sile, v. i. To drop; to flow; to fall. [Prov. Eng.]

Sile, n. 1. A sieve with fine meshes. [Prov. Eng.]

2. Filth; sediment. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Sile, n. [Icel. sld herring; akin to Sw. sill, Dan. sild. Cf. Sill the
young of a herring.] (Zoöl.) A young or small herring. [Eng.] Pennant.

Si"lence (?), n. [F., fr. L. silentium. See Silent.]

1. The state of being silent; entire absence of sound or noise;
absolute stillness.

    I saw and heared; for such a numerous host Fled not in silence
    through the frighted deep.


Milton.

2. Forbearance from, or absence of, speech; taciturnity; muteness.

3. Secrecy; as, these things were transacted in silence.

    The administration itself keeps a profound silence.


D. Webster.

4. The cessation of rage, agitation, or tumilt; calmness; quiest; as,
the elements were reduced to silence.

5. Absence of mention; oblivion.

    And what most merits fame, in silence hid.


Milton.

Si"lence, interj. Be silent; -- used elliptically for let there be
silence, or keep silence. Shak.

Si"lence, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Silenced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Silencing
(?).] 1. To compel to silence; to cause to be still; to still; to hush.

    Silence that dreadful bell; it frights the isle.


Shak.

2. To put to rest; to quiet.

    This would silence all further opposition.


Clarendon.

    These would have silenced their scruples.


Rogers.

3. To restrain from the exercise of any function, privilege of
instruction, or the like, especially from the act of preaching; as, to
silence a minister of the gospel.

    The Rev. Thomas Hooker of Chelmsford, in Essex, was silenced for
    nonconformity.


B. Trumbull.

4. To cause to cease firing, as by a vigorous cannonade; as, to silence
the batteries of an enemy.

Si*le"ne (?), n. [NL., fr. L. Silenus, the attendant of Bacchus.]
(Bot.) A genus of caryophyllaceous plants, usually covered with a
viscid secretion by which insects are caught; catchfly.

Bon Silène. See Silène, in the Vocabulary.

Si"lent (?), a. [L. silens, - entis, p. pr. of silere to be silent;
akin to Goth. ana- silan.] 1. Free from sound or noise; absolutely
still; perfectly quiet.

    How silent is this town!


Shak.

2. Not speaking; indisposed to talk; speechless; mute; taciturn; not
loquacious; not talkative.

    Ulysses, adds he, was the most eloquent and most silent of men.


Broome.

    This new-created world, whereof in hell Fame is not silent.


Milton.

3. Keeping at rest; inactive; calm; undisturbed; as, the wind is
silent. Parnell. Sir W. Raleigh.

4. (Pron.) Not pronounced; having no sound; quiescent; as, e is silent
in "fable."

5. Having no effect; not operating; inefficient. [R.]

    Cause . . . silent, virtueless, and dead.


Sir W. Raleigh.

Silent partner. See Dormant partner, under Dormant.

Syn. -- Mute; taciturn; dumb; speechless; quiet; still. See Mute, and
Taciturn.

Si"lent, n. That which is silent; a time of silence. [R.] "The silent
of the night." Shak.

Si*len"ti*a*ry (s*ln"sh**r), n. [L. silentiarius: cf. F. silenciaire.
See Silence.] One appointed to keep silence and order in court; also,
one sworn not to divulge secrets of state.

Si*len"tious (?), a. [L. silentiosus: cf. F. silencieux.] Habitually
silent; taciturn; reticent. [R.]

Si"lent*ly (?), adv. In a silent manner.

Si"lent*ness, n. State of being silent; silence.

Si*le"nus (?), n. [L. Silenus the tutor and attendant of Bacchus.]
(Zoöl.) See Wanderoo.

Si*le"si*a (?), n. 1. A kind of linen cloth, originally made in
Silesia, a province of Prussia.

2. A twilled cotton fabric, used for dress linings.

Si*le"si*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Silesia. -- n. A native or
inhabitant of Silesia.

Si"lex (?), n. [L., a finit, a pebblestone.] (Min.) Silica, SiO2 as
found in nature, constituting quarz, and most sands and sandstones. See
Silica, and Silicic.

Sil`hou*ette" (?), n. [F.; -- so called from Etienne de Silhoutte, a
French minister of finance in 1759, whise diversion it was to make such
portraits on the walls of his apartments.] A representation of the
outlines of an object filled in with a black color; a profile portrait
in black, such as a shadow appears to be.

Sil`hou*ette", v. t. To represent by a silhouette; to project upon a
background, so as to be like a silhouette. [Recent]

    A flock of roasting vultures silhouetted on the sky.


The Century.

Sil"i*ca (?), n. [NL., from L. silex, silics, a flint.] (Chem.) Silicon
dioxide, SiO&?;. It constitutes ordinary quartz (also opal and
tridymite), and is artifically prepared as a very fine, white,
tasteless, inodorous powder.

Sil"i*cate (?), n.[Cf. F. silicate.] (Chem.) A salt of silicic acid.

In mineralogical chemistry the silicates include; the unisilicates or
orthosilicates, salts of orthosilicic acid; the bisilicates or
metasilicates, salts of metasilicic acid; the polysilicates or acid
silicates, salts of the polysilicic acids; the basic silicates or
subsilicates, in which the equivalent of base is greater than would be
required to neutralize the acid; and the hydrous silicates, including
the zeolites and many hydrated decomposition products.

Sil"i*ca`ted (?), a. (Chem.) Combined or impregnated with silicon or
silica; as, silicated hydrogen; silicated rocks.

Silicated soap, a hard soap containing silicate of soda.

Sil`i*ca*ti*za"tion (?), n. Silicification.

||Si*lic"e*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) Same as Silicoidea.

Si*li"ceous (?), a. [L. siliceus, fr. silex, silicis, a flint.] Of or
pertaining to silica; containing silica, or partaking of its nature.
[Written also silisious.]

Si*lic"ic (?), a. [L. silex, silicis, a flint: cf. F. silicique.]
(Chem.) Pertaining to, derived from, or resembling, silica;
specifically, designating compounds of silicon; as, silicic acid.

Silicic acid (Chem.), an amorphous gelatinous substance, Si(HO)4, very
unstable and easily dried to silica, but forming many stable salts; --
called also orthosilicic, or normal silicic, acid.

Si*lic`i*cal*ca"re*ous (?), a. Consisting of silica and calcareous
matter.

Sil"i*cide (?), n. (Chem.) A binary compound of silicon, or one
regarded as binary. [R.]

Hydrogen silicide (Chem.), a colorless, spontaneously inflammable gas,
SiH4, produced artifically from silicon, and analogous to methane; --
called also silico-methane, silicon hydride, and formerly siliciureted
hydrogen.

Sil`i*cif"er*ous (?), a. [L. silex, silicis, a flint + -ferous.]
Producing silica; united with silica.

Si*lic`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [See Silicify.] (Chem.) Thae act or process
of combining or impregnating with silicon or silica; the state of being
so combined or impregnated; as, the silicification of wood.

Si*lic"i*fied (?), a. (Chem.) Combined or impregnated with silicon or
silica, especially the latter; as, silicified wood.

Si*lic"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Silicified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Silicifying (?).] [L. silex, silicis, a flint + -fy: cf. F.
silicifier.] (Chem.) To convert into, or to impregnate with, silica, or
with the compounds of silicon.

    The specimens found . . . are completely silicified.


Say.

The silica may take the form of agate, chalcedony, flint, hornstone, or
crystalline quartz.

Si*lic"i*fy, v. i. To become converted into silica, or to be
impregnated with silica.

||Sil`i*ci*oi"de*a (?), n. pl. (Zoöl.) Same as Silicoidea.

Si*li"cious (?), a. See Siliceous.

||Sil`i*ci*spon"gi*æ (?), n. pl. [NL. See Silex, and Sponge.] (Zoöl.)
||Same as Silicoidea.

Si*lic"it*ed (?), a. Silicified. [Obs.]

Si*lic"i*um (?), n. See Silicon.

Si*lic"i*u*ret`ed (?), a. [Written also siliciuretted.] (Old. Chem.)
Combined or impregnated with silicon. [Obsoles.]

Siliciureted hydrogen. (Chem.) Hydrogen silicide. [Obs.]

Sil"i*cle (?), n. [L. silicula, dim. of siliqua a pod or husk: cf. F.
silicule.] (Bot.) A seed vessel resembling a silique, but about as
broad as it is long. See Silique.

Sil"i*co- (?). (Chem.) A combining form (also used adjectively)
denoting the presence of silicon or its compounds; as, silicobenzoic,
silicofluoride, etc.

Sil`i*co*flu*or"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Containing, or composed of, silicon
and fluorine; especially, denoting the compounds called
silicofluorides.

Silicofluoric acid (Chem.), a compound of hydrofluoric acid and silicon
fluoride, known only in watery solution. It is produced by the action
of silicon fluoride on water, and is regarded as an acid, H2SiF6, and
the type and origin of the silicofluorides.

Sil`i*co*flu"or*ide (?), n. (Chem.) A fluosilicate; a salt of
silicofluoric acid.

||Sil`i*coi"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL. See Silex, and -oid.] (Zoöl.) An
||extensive order of Porifera, which includes those that have the
||skeleton composed mainly of siliceous fibers or spicules.

Sil"i*con (?), n. [See Silica.] (Chem.) A nonmetalic element analogous
to carbon. It always occurs combined in nature, and is artificially
obtained in the free state, usually as a dark brown amorphous powder,
or as a dark crystalline substance with a meetallic luster. Its oxide
is silica, or common quartz, and in this form, or as silicates, it is,
next to oxygen, the most abundant element of the earth's crust. Silicon
is characteristically the element of the mineral kingdom, as carbon is
of the organic world. Symbol Si. Atomic weight 28. Called also
silicium.

Sil`i*co*tung"stic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or designating,
any one of a series of double acids of silicon and tungsten, known in
the free state, and also in their salts (called silicotungstates).

||Si*lic"u*la (?), n. [L.] (Bot.) A silicle.

Sil"i*cule (?), n. (Bot.) A silicle.

Si*lic"u*lose` (?), a. [NL. siliculosus, fr. L. silicula: cf. F.
siliculeux. See Silicle.] 1. (Bot.) Bearing silicles; pertaining to, or
resembling, silicles.

2. Full of, or consisting of, husks; husky. [Obs.]

Si*lig"i*nose` (?), a.[L. siligineus, fr. siligo, -inis, fine and very
white wheat.] Made of fine wheat. [Obs.] Bailey.

Sil"ing (?), a. & n. from Sile to strain. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Siling dish, a colander. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Sil"i*qua (?), n.; pl. Siliquæ (#). [L. See Silique.] 1. (Bot.) Same as
Silique.

2. A weight of four grains; a carat; -- a term used by jewelers, and
refiners of gold.

Sil"ique (?), n. [L. siliqua a pod or husk, a very small weight or
measure: cf. F. silique.] (Bot.) An oblong or elongated seed vessel,
consisting of two valves with a dissepiment between, and opening by
sutures at either margin. The seeds are attached to both edges of the
dissepiment, alternately upon each side of it.

Sil"i*qui*form (?), a. [Silique + -form: cf. F. siliquiforme.] (Bot.)
Having the form of a silique.

||Sil`i*quo"sa (?), n. pl. [NL. See Siliquose.] (Bot.) A Linnæan order
||of plants including those which bear siliques.

{ Sil"i*quose` (?), Sil"i*quous (?), } a. [NL. siliquosus: cf. F.
siliqueux.] (Bot.) Bearing siliques; as, siliquose plants; pertaining
to, or resembling, siliques; as, siliquose capsules.

Silk (?), n. [OE. silk, selk, AS. seolc, seoloc; akin to Icel. silki,
SW. & Dan. silke; prob. through Slavic from an Oriental source; cf.
Lith. szilkai, Russ. shelk', and also L. sericum Seric stuff, silk. Cf.
Sericeous. Serge a woolen stuff.] 1. The fine, soft thread produced by
various species of caterpillars in forming the cocoons within which the
worm is inclosed during the pupa state, especially that produced by the
larvæ of Bombyx mori.

2. Hence, thread spun, or cloth woven, from the above-named material.

3. That which resembles silk, as the filiform styles of the female
flower of maize.

Raw silk, silk as it is wound off from the cocoons, and before it is
manufactured. -- Silk cotton, a cottony substance enveloping the seeds
of the silk-cotton tree. -- Silk-cotton tree (Bot.), a name for several
tropical trees of the genera Bombax and Eriodendron, and belonging to
the order Bombaceæ. The trees grow to an immense size, and have their
seeds enveloped in a cottony substance, which is used for stuffing
cushions, but can not be spun. -- Silk flower. (Bot.) (a) The silk
tree. (b) A similar tree (Calliandra trinervia) of Peru. -- Silk fowl
(Zoöl.), a breed of domestic fowls having silky plumage. -- Silk gland
(Zoöl.), a gland which secretes the material of silk, as in spider or a
silkworm; a sericterium. -- Silk gown, the distinctive robe of a
barrister who has been appointed king's or queen's counsel; hence, the
counsel himself. Such a one has precedence over mere barristers, who
wear stuff gowns. [Eng.] -- Silk grass (Bot.), a kind of grass (Stipa
comata) of the Western United States, which has very long silky awns.
The name is also sometimes given to various species of the genera Aqave
and Yucca. -- Silk moth (Zoöl.), the adult moth of any silkworm. See
Silkworm. -- Silk shag, a coarse, rough-woven silk, like plush, but
with a stiffer nap. -- Silk spider (Zoöl.), a large spider (Nephila
plumipes), native of the Southern United States, remarkable for the
large quantity of strong silk it produces and for the great disparity
in the sizes of the sexes. -- Silk thrower, Silk throwster, one who
twists or spins silk, and prepares it for weaving. Brande & C. -- Silk
tree (Bot.), an Asiatic leguminous tree (Albizzia Julibrissin) with
finely bipinnate leaves, and large flat pods; -- so called because of
the abundant long silky stamens of its blossoms. Also called silk
flower. -- Silk vessel. (Zoöl.) Same as Silk gland, above. -- Virginia
silk (Bot.), a climbing plant (Periploca Græca) of the Milkweed family,
having a silky tuft on the seeds. It is native in Southern Europe.

Silk"en (?), a. [AS. seolcen, seolocen.] 1. Of or pertaining to silk;
made of, or resembling, silk; as, silken cloth; a silken veil.

2. Fig.: Soft; delicate; tender; smooth; as, silken language. "Silken
terms precise." Shak.

3. Dressed in silk. "A . . . silken wanton." Shak.

Silk"en, v. t. To render silken or silklike. Dyer.

Silk"i*ness (?), n. 1. The quality or state of being silky or silken;
softness and smoothness.

2. Fig.: Effeminacy; weakness. [R.] B. Jonson.

Silk"man (?), n.; pl. Silkmen (&?;). A dealer in silks; a silk mercer.
Shak.

<! p. 1341 !>

Silk"ness (?), n. Silkiness. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Silk"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) Any plant of the genera Asclepias and
Acerates whose seed vessels contain a long, silky down; milkweed.

Silk"worm` (?), n. [AS. seolcwyrm.] (Zoöl.) The larva of any one of
numerous species of bombycid moths, which spins a large amount of
strong silk in constructing its cocoon before changing to a pupa.

The common species (Bombyx mori) feeds on the leaves of the white
mulberry tree. It is native of China, but has long been introduced into
other countries of Asia and Europe, and is reared on a large scale. In
America it is reared only to small extent. The Ailanthus silkworm
(Philosamia cynthia) is a much larger species, of considerable
importance, which has been introduced into Europe and America from
China. The most useful American species is the Polyphemus. See
Polyphemus.

Pernyi silkworm, the larva of the Pernyi moth. See Pernyi moth. --
Silkworm gut, a substance prepared from the contents of the silk glands
of silkworms and used in making lines for angling. See Gut. - -
Silkworm rot, a disease of silkworms; muscardine.

Silk"y (?), a. [Compar. Silkier (?); superl. Silkiest.] 1. Of or
pertaining to silk; made of, or resembling, silk; silken; silklike; as,
a silky luster.

2. Hence, soft and smooth; as, silky wine.

3. Covered with soft hairs pressed close to the surface, as a leaf;
sericeous.

Silky oak (Bot.), a lofty Australian tree (Grevillea robusta) with
silky tomentose lobed or incised leaves. It furnishes a valuable
timber.

Sill (?), n. [OE. sille, sylle, AS. syl, syll; akin to G. schwelle,
OHG. swelli, Icel. syll, svill, Sw. syll, Dan. syld, Goth. gasuljan to
lay a foundation, to found.] The basis or foundation of a thing;
especially, a horizontal piece, as a timber, which forms the lower
member of a frame, or supports a structure; as, the sills of a house,
of a bridge, of a loom, and the like. Hence: (a) The timber or stone at
the foot of a door; the threshold. (b) The timber or stone on which a
window frame stands; or, the lowest piece in a window frame. (c) The
floor of a gallery or passage in a mine. (d) A piece of timber across
the bottom of a canal lock for the gates to shut against.

Sill course (Arch.), a horizontal course of stone, terra cotta, or the
like, built into a wall at the level of one or more window sills, these
sills often forming part of it.

Sill, n. [Cf. Thill.] The shaft or thill of a carriage. [Prov. Eng.]

Sill, n. [Cf. 4th Sile.] A young herring. [Eng.]

Sil"la*bub (?), n. [Cf. sile to strain, and bub liquor, also Prov. E.
sillibauk.] A dish made by mixing wine or cider with milk, and thus
forming a soft curd; also, sweetened cream, flavored with wine and
beaten to a stiff froth. [Written also syllabub.]

Sil"ler (?), n. Silver. [Scot.]

Sil"li*ly (?), adv. [From Silly.] In a silly manner; foolishly. Dryden.

Sil"li*man*ite (?), n. [After Benjamin Siliman, an American
meneralogist.] (Min.) Same as Fibrolite.

Sil"li*ness, n. The quality or state of being silly.

Sil"lock (?), n. (Zoöl.) The pollock, or coalfish.

Sil"lon (?), n. [F., a furrow.] (Fort.) A work raised in the middle of
a wide ditch, to defend it. Crabb.

Sil"ly, a. [Compar. Sillier (?); superl. Silliest.] [OE. seely, sely,
AS. s&?;lig, ges&?;lig, happy, good, fr. s&?;l, s&?;l, good, happy,
s&?;l good fortune, happines; akin to OS. slig, a, good, happy, D.
zalig blessed, G. selig, OHG. slg, Icel. s&?;l, Sw. säll, Dan. salig,
Goth. s&?;ls good, kind, and perh. also to L. sollus whole, entire, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;, Skr. sarva. Cf. Seel, n.] 1. Happy; fortunate; blessed.
[Obs.] Chaucer.

2. Harmless; innocent; inoffensive. [Obs.] "This silly, innocent
Custance." Chaucer.

    The silly virgin strove him to withstand.


Spenser.

    A silly, innocent hare murdered of a dog.


Robynson (More's Utopia).

3. Weak; helpless; frail. [Obs.]

    After long storms . . . With which my silly bark was tossed sore.


Spenser.

    The silly buckets on the deck.


Coleridge.

4. Rustic; plain; simple; humble. [Obs.]

    A fourth man, in a sillyhabit.


Shak.

    All that did their silly thoughts so busy keep.


Milton.

5. Weak in intellect; destitute of ordinary strength of mind; foolish;
witless; simple; as, a silly woman.

6. Proceeding from want of understanding or common judgment;
characterized by weakness or folly; unwise; absurd; stupid; as, silly
conduct; a silly question.

Syn. -- Simple; brainless; witless; shallow; foolish; unwise;
indiscreet. See Simple.

Sil"ly*how (?), n. [Prov. E. silly- hew; cf. AS. slig happy, good, and
hfe a cap, hood. See Silly, a.] A caul. See Caul, n., 3. [Obs. or Prov.
Eng. & Scot.]

Si"lo (?), n. [F.] A pit or vat for packing away green fodder for
winter use so as to exclude air and outside moisture. See Ensilage.

Silt (?), n. [OE. silte gravel, fr. silen to drain, E. sile; probably
of Scand. origin; cf. Sw. sila, prob. akin to AS. seón to filter, sgan
to fall, sink, cause to sink, G. seihen to strain, to filter, OHG.
sihan, Icel. s>a, Skr. sic to pour; cf. Gr. &?;&?;&?; moisture. Cf.
Sig, Sile.] Mud or fine earth deposited from running or standing water.

Silt, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Silted; p. pr. & vb. n. Silting.] To choke,
fill, or obstruct with silt or mud.

Silt, v. i. To flow through crevices; to percolate.

Silt"y (?), a. Full of silt; resembling silt.

Si*lure" (?), n. [L. silurus a sort of river fish, Gr. &?;&?;&?;: cf.
F. silure.] (Zoöl.) A fish of the genus Silurus, as the sheatfish; a
siluroid.

Si*lu"ri*an (?), a. [From L. Silures, a people who anciently inhabited
a part of England and Wales.] (Geol.) Of or pertaining to the country
of the ancient Silures; -- a term applied to the earliest of the
Paleozoic eras, and also to the strata of the era, because most plainly
developed in that country.

The Silurian formation, so named by Murchison, is divided into the
Upper Silurian and Lower Silurian. The lower part of the Lower
Silurian, with some underlying beds, is now separated under the name
Cambrian, first given by Sedwick. Recently the term Ordovician has been
proposed for the Lower Silurian, leawing the original word to apply
only to the Upper Silurian.

Si*lu"ri*an, n. The Silurian age.

Si*lu"ri*dan (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any fish of the family Siluridæ or of the
order Siluroidei.

Si*lu"roid (?), n. [Silurus + -oid.] (Zoöl.) Belonging to the
Siluroidei, or Nematognathi, an order of fishes including numerous
species, among which are the American catfishes and numerous allied
fresh-water species of the Old World, as the sheatfish (Silurus glanis)
of Europe. -- n. A siluroid fish.

||Sil`u*roi"de*i (?), n. pl. [NL.] (zoöl.) An order of fishes, the
||Nematognathi.

||Si*lu"rus (?), n. [L. See Silure.] (Zoöl.) A genus of large
||malacopterygious fishes of the order Siluroidei. They inhabit the
||inland waters of Europe and Asia.

Sil"va (?), n.; pl. E. Silvas (#), L. Silvae (&?;). [L., properly, a
wood, forest.] [Written also sylva.] (Bot.) (a) The forest trees of a
region or country, considered collectively. (b) A description or
history of the forest trees of a country.

Sil"van (?), a. [L. silva, less correctly sylva, a wood or grove, perh.
akin to Gr. "y`lh; cf. L. Silvanus Silvanus the god of woods: cf. F.
sylvain silvan. Cf. Savage.] Of or pertaining to woods; composed of
woods or groves; woody. [Written also sylvan.]

    Betwixt two rows of rocks, a silvan scene Appears above, and groves
    forever green.


Dryden.

Sil"van, n. (Old Chem.) See Sylvanium. [Obs.]

Sil"van*ite (?), n. (Min.) See Sylvanite.

{ Sil"vas (?) or Sel"vas (?) }, n. pl. [L. silva a forest, Sp. selva.]
Vast woodland plains of South America.

Sil"vate (?), n. (Chem.) Same as Sylvate.

Sil"ver (?), n. [OE. silver, selver, seolver, AS. seolfor, siolfur,
siolufr, silofr, sylofr; akin to OS. silubar, OFries. selover, D.
zilver, LG. sulver, OHG. silabar, silbar, G. silber, Icel. silfr, Sw.
silfver, Dan. sölv, Goth. silubr, Russ. serebro, Lith. sidabras; of
unknown origin.] 1. (Chem.) A soft white metallic element, sonorous,
ductile, very malleable, and capable of a high degree of polish. It is
found native, and also combined with sulphur, arsenic, antimony,
chlorine, etc., in the minerals argentite, proustite, pyrargyrite,
ceragyrite, etc. Silver is one of the "noble" metals, so-called, not
being easily oxidized, and is used for coin, jewelry, plate, and a
great variety of articles. Symbol Ag (Argentum). Atomic weight 107.7.
Specific gravity 10.5.

Silver was known under the name of luna to the ancients and also to the
alchemists. Some of its compounds, as the halogen salts, are remarkable
for the effect of light upon them, and are used in photography.

2. Coin made of silver; silver money.

3. Anything having the luster or appearance of silver.

4. The color of silver.

Silver is used in the formation of many compounds of obvious meaning;
as, silver-armed, silver-bright, silver-buskined, silver-coated,
silver-footed, silver-haired, silver-headed, silver-mantled,
silver-plated, silver-slippered, silver-sounding, silver-studded,
silver-tongued, silver-white. See Silver, a.

Black silver (Min.), stephanite; -- called also brittle silver ore, or
brittle silver glance. -- Fulminating silver. (Chem.) (a) A black
crystalline substance, Ag2O.(NH3)2, obtained by dissolving silver oxide
in aqua ammonia. When dry it explodes violently on the slightest
percussion. (b) Silver fulminate, a white crystalline substance,
Ag2C2N2O2, obtained by adding alcohol to a solution of silver nitrate.
When dry it is violently explosive. -- German silver. (Chem.) See under
German. -- Gray silver. (Min.) See Freieslebenite. -- Horn silver.
(Min.) See Cerargyrite. -- King's silver. (O. Eng. Law) See Postfine.
-- Red silver, or Ruby silver. (Min.) See Proustite, and Pyrargyrite.
-- Silver beater, one who beats silver into silver leaf or silver foil.
-- Silver glance, or Vitreous silver. (Min.) See Argentine.

Sil"ver, a. 1. Of or pertaining to silver; made of silver; as, silver
leaf; a silver cup.

2. Resembling silver. Specifically: (a) Bright; resplendent; white.
"Silver hair." Shak.

    Others, on silver lakes and rivers, bathed Their downy breast.


Milton.

(b) Precious; costly. (c) Giving a clear, ringing sound soft and clear.
"Silver voices." Spenser. (d) Sweet; gentle; peaceful. "Silver
slumber." Spenser.

American silver fir (Bot.), the balsam fir. See under Balsam. -- Silver
age (Roman Lit.), the latter part (a. d. 14-180) of the classical
period of Latinity, -- the time of writers of inferior purity of
language, as compared with those of the previous golden age, so-called.
-- Silver-bell tree (Bot.), an American shrub or small tree (Halesia
tetraptera) with white bell-shaped flowers in clusters or racemes; the
snowdrop tree. -- Silver bush (Bot.), a shrubby leguminous plant
(Anthyllis Barba- Jovis) of Southern Europe, having silvery foliage. --
Silver chub (Zoöl.), the fallfish. -- Silver eel. (Zoöl.) (a) The
cutlass fish. (b) A pale variety of the common eel. -- Silver fir
(Bot.), a coniferous tree (Abies pectinata) found in mountainous
districts in the middle and south of Europe, where it often grows to
the height of 100 or 150 feet. It yields Burgundy pitch and Strasburg
turpentine. -- Silver foil, foil made of silver. -- Silver fox (Zoöl.),
a variety of the common fox (Vulpes vulpes, variety argenteus) found in
the northern parts of Asia, Europe, and America. Its fur is nearly
black, with silvery tips, and is highly valued. Called also black fox,
and silver-gray fox. -- Silver gar. (Zoöl.) See Billfish (a). -- Silver
grain (Bot.), the lines or narrow plates of cellular tissue which pass
from the pith to the bark of an exogenous stem; the medullary rays. In
the wood of the oak they are much larger than in that of the beech,
maple, pine, cherry, etc. -- Silver grebe (Zoöl.), the red-throated
diver. See Illust. under Diver. -- Silver hake (Zoöl.), the American
whiting. -- Silver leaf, leaves or sheets made of silver beaten very
thin. -- Silver lunge (Zoöl.), the namaycush. -- Silver
moonfish.(Zoöl.) See Moonfish (b). -- Silver moth (Zoöl.), a lepisma.
-- Silver owl (Zoöl.), the barn owl. -- Silver perch (Zoöl.), the
mademoiselle, 2. -- Silver pheasant (Zoöl.), any one of several species
of beautiful crested and long-tailed Asiatic pheasants, of the genus
Euplocamus. They have the tail and more or less of the upper parts
silvery white. The most common species (E. nychtemerus) is native of
China. -- Silver plate, domestic utensils made of silver. -- Silver
plover (Zoöl.), the knot. -- Silver salmon (Zoöl.), a salmon
(Oncorhynchus kisutch) native of both coasts of the North Pacific. It
ascends all the American rivers as far south as the Sacramento. Called
also kisutch, whitefish, and white salmon. -- Silver shell (Zoöl.), a
marine bivalve of the genus Anomia. See Anomia. -- Silver steel, an
alloy of steel with a very small proportion of silver. -- Silver stick,
a title given to the title field officer of the Life Guards when on
duty at the palace. [Eng.] Thackeray. -- Silver tree (Bot.), a South
African tree (Leucadendron argenteum) with long, silvery, silky leaves.
-- Silver trout, (Zoöl.) See Trout. -- Silver wedding. See under
Wedding. -- Silver whiting (Zoöl.), a marine sciænoid food fish
(Menticirrus littoralis) native of the Southern United States; --
called also surf whiting. -- Silver witch (Zoöl.), A lepisma.

Sil"ver (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Silvered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Silvering.] 1. To cover with silver; to give a silvery appearance to by
applying a metal of a silvery color; as, to silver a pin; to silver a
glass mirror plate with an amalgam of tin and mercury.

2. To polish like silver; to impart a brightness to, like that of
silver.

    And smiling calmness silvered o'er the deep.


Pope.

3. To make hoary, or white, like silver.

    His head was silvered o'er with age.


Gay.

Sil"ver, v. i. To acquire a silvery color. [R.]

    The eastern sky began to silver and shine.


L. Wallace.

Sil"ver*back` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The knot.

Sil"ver*ber`ry (?), n. (Bot.) A tree or shrub (Elæagnus argentea) with
silvery foliage and fruit. Gray.

Sil"ver*bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) An Old World finch of the genus Minia, as
the M. Malabarica of India, and M. cantans of Africa.

Sil"ver*boom` (?), n. [D. zilver silver + boom tree.] (Bot.) See
Leucadendron.

Sil"ver*fin` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A small North American fresh-water
cyprinoid fish (Notropis Whipplei).

Sil"ver*fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The tarpum. (b) A white variety of
the goldfish.

Sil"ver-gray` (?), a. Having a gray color with a silvery luster; as,
silver-gray hair.

Sil"ver*i*ness (?), n. The state of being silvery.

Sil"ver*ing, n. (Metal.) The art or process of covering metals, wood,
paper, glass, etc., with a thin film of metallic silver, or a substance
resembling silver; also, the firm do laid on; as, the silvering of a
glass speculum.

Sil"ver*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Silverized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Silverizing.] To cover with silver.

Sil"ver*less, a. Having no silcver; hence, without money; impecunious.
Piers Plowman.

Sil"ver*ling, n. A small silver coin. [Obs.]

    A thousand vines at a thousand silverings.


Isa. vii. 23.

Sil"ver*ly, adv. Like silver in appearance or in sound.

    Let me wipe off this honorable dew, That silverly doth progress on
    thy cheeks.


Shak.

Sil"vern (?), a. [AS. seolfern, sylfren.] Made of silver. [Archaic.]
Wyclif (Acts xix. 24).

    Speech is silvern; silence is golden.


Old Proverb.

Sil"ver*sides` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of small
fishes of the family Atherinidæ, having a silvery stripe along each
side of the body. The common species of the American coast (Menidia
notata) is very abundant. Called also silverside, sand smelt, friar,
tailor, and tinker.

Brook silversides (Zoöl.), a small fresh-water North American fish
(Labadesthes sicculus) related to the marine silversides.

<! p. 1342 !>

Sil"ver*smith` (?), n. One whose occupation is to manufacture utensils,
ornaments, etc., of silver; a worker in silver.

Sil"ver*spot` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of
butterflies of the genus Argynnis and allied genera, having silvery
spots on the under side of the wings. See Illust. under Aphrodite.

Sil"ver*ware` (?), n. Dishes, vases, ornaments, and utensils of various
sorts, made of silver.

Sil"ver*weed` (?), n. (Bot.) A perennial rosaceous herb (Potentilla
Anserina) having the leaves silvery white beneath.

Sil"ver*y (?), a. 1. Resembling, or having the luster of, silver;
grayish white and lustrous; of a mild luster; bright.

    All the enameled race, whose silvery wing Waves to the tepid
    zephyrs of the spring.


Pope.

2. Besprinkled or covered with silver.

3. Having the clear, musical tone of silver; soft and clear in sound;
as, silvery voices; a silvery laugh.

Silvery iron (Metal.), a peculiar light-gray fine-grained cast iron,
usually obtained from clay iron ore.

Sil"vi*cul`ture (?), n. [Cf. F. silviculture.] See Sylviculture.

Si"ma (?), n. (Arch.) A cyma.

Sim"a*gre (?), n. [F. simagrée.] A grimace. [Obs.] Dryden.

Si*mar" (?), n. [F. simarre. See Chimere.] A woman's long dress or
robe; also light covering; a scarf. [Written also cimar, cymar, samare,
simare.]

||Si`marre" (?). [F.] See Simar. Sir W. Scott.

Sim"blot (?), n. [F. simbleau.] The harness of a drawloom.

||Sim"i*a (?), n. [L., an ape; cf. simus flatnosed, snub-nosed, Gr.
||&?;&?;&?;.] (Zoöl.) A Linnæan genus of Quadrumana which included the
||types of numerous modern genera. By modern writers it is usually
||restricted to the genus which includes the orang- outang.

Sim"i*al (?), a. (Zoöl.) Simian; apelike.

Sim"i*an (?), a. [L. simia an ape.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the
family Simiadæ, which, in its widest sense, includes all the Old World
apes and monkeys; also, apelike. -- n. Any Old World monkey or ape.

Sim"i*lar (?), a. [F. similaire, fr. L. similis like, similar. See
Same, a., and cf. Simulate.] 1. Exactly corresponding; resembling in
all respects; precisely like.

2. Nearly corresponding; resembling in many respects; somewhat like;
having a general likeness.

3. Homogenous; uniform. [R.] Boyle.

Similar figures (Geom.), figures which differ from each other only in
magnitude, being made up of the same number of like parts similarly
situated. -- Similar rectilineal figures, such as have their several
angles respectively equal, each to each, and their sides about the
equal angles proportional. -- Similar solids, such as are contained by
the same number of similar planes, similarly situated, and having like
inclination to one another.

Sim"i*lar, n. That which is similar to, or resembles, something else,
as in quality, form, etc.

Sim`i*lar"i*ty (?), n.; pl. -ties (#). [Cf. F. similarité.] The quality
or state of being similar; likeness; resemblance; as, a similarity of
features.

    Hardly is there a similarity detected between two or three facts,
    than men hasten to extend it to all.


Sir W. Hamilton.

Sim"i*lar*ly (?), adv. In a similar manner.

Sim"i*lar*y (?), a. Similar. [Obs.]

    Rhyming cadences of similarly words.


South.

Sim"i*la*tive (?), a. Implying or indicating likeness or resemblance.
[R.]

    In similative or instrumental relation to a pa. pple. [past
    participle], as almond-leaved, -scented, etc.


New English Dict.

Sim"i*le (?), n.; pl. Similes (#). [L., from similis. See Similar.]
(Rhet.) A word or phrase by which anything is likened, in one or more
of its aspects, to something else; a similitude; a poetical or
imaginative comparison.

    A good swift simile, but something currish.


Shak.

||Si*mil"i*ter (?), n. [L., in like manner.] (Law) The technical name
||of the form by which either party, in pleading, accepts the issue
||tendered by his opponent; -- called sometimes a joinder in issue.

Si*mil"i*tude (?), n. [F. similitude, L. similitudo, from similis
similar. See Similar.] 1. The quality or state of being similar or
like; resemblance; likeness; similarity; as, similitude of substance.
Chaucer.

    Let us make now man in our image, man In our similitude.


Milton.

    If fate some future bard shall join In sad similitude of griefs to
    mine.


Pope.

2. The act of likening, or that which likens, one thing to another;
fanciful or imaginative comparison; a simile.

    Tasso, in his similitudes, never departed from the woods; that is,
    all his comparisons were taken from the country.


Dryden.

3. That which is like or similar; a representation, semblance, or copy;
a facsimile.

    Man should wed his similitude.


Chaucer.

Si*mil`i*tu"di*na*ry (?), a. Involving or expressing similitude. [Obs.]
Coke.

Sim"i*lize (?), v. t. To liken; to compare; as, to similize a person,
thing, or act. Lowell.

Sim"i*lor (?), n. [F., fr. L. similus similar + F. or gold, L. aurum.
Cf. Semilor.] An alloy of copper and zinc, resembling brass, but of a
golden color. Ure.

Sim"i*ous (?), a.[L. simia an ape.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the
Simiæ; monkeylike.

    That strange simious, schoolboy passion of giving pain to others.


Sydney Smith.

Sim"i*tar (?), n. See Scimiter.

Sim"mer (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Simmered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Simmering.] [Prov. E. also simper; -- an onomatopoetic word.] To boil
gently, or with a gentle hissing; to begin to boil.

    I simmer as liquor doth on the fire before it beginneth to boil.


Palsgrave.

Sim"mer, v. t. To cause to boil gently; to cook in liquid heated almost
or just to the boiling point.

Sim"nel (?), n. [OF. simenel cake or bread of wheat flour, LL.
simenellus wheat bread, fr. L. simila the finest wheat flour. Cf.
Semolina.] 1. A kind of cake made of fine flour; a cracknel. [Obs.]

    Not common bread, but vastel bread, or simnels.


Fuller.

2. A kind of rich plum cake, eaten especially on Mid-Lent Sunday.
[Eng.] Herrick.

Si*mo"ni*ac (?), n. [LL. simoniacus. See Simony.] One who practices
simony, or who buys or sells preferment in the church. Ayliffe.

Sim`o*ni"a*cal (?), a. Of or pertaining to simony; guilty of simony;
consisting of simony. -- Sim"o*ni`a*cal*ly, adv.

    The flagitious profligacy of their lives, and the simoniacal arts
    by which they grasped at the popedom.


J. S. Harford.

Si*mo"ni*al (?), a. Simoniacal. [Obs.]

Si*mo"ni*an (?), n.[See Simony.] One of the followers of Simon Magus;
also, an adherent of certain heretical sects in the early Christian
church.

Si*mo"ni*ous (?), a. Simoniacal. [Obs.] Milton.

Sim"o*nist (?), n. One who practices simony.

Sim"o*ny (?), n. [F. simonie, LL. simonia, fr. Simon Magus, who wished
to purchase the power of conferring the Holy Spirit. Acts viii.] The
crime of buying or selling ecclesiastical preferment; the corrupt
presentation of any one to an ecclesiastical benefice for money or
reward. Piers Plowman.

{ Si*moom" (?), Si*moon" (?), } n. [Ar. sam&?;m, fr. samma to poison.
Cf. Samiel.] A hot, dry, suffocating, dust-laden wind, that blows
occasionally in Arabia, Syria, and neighboring countries, generated by
the extreme heat of the parched deserts or sandy plains.

Si"mous (?), a.[L. simus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;.] Having a very flat or snub
nose, with the end turned up.

Sim"pai (?), n.[Malay simpei.] (Zoöl.) A long-tailed monkey
(Semnopitchecus melalophus) native of Sumatra. It has a crest of black
hair. The forehead and cheeks are fawn color, the upper parts tawny and
red, the under parts white. Called also black-crested monkey, and
sinpæ.

Sim"per (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Simpered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Simpering.] [Cf. Norw. semper fine, smart, dial. Dan. semper, simper,
affected, coy, prudish, OSw. semper one who affectedly refrains from
eating, Sw. sipp finical, prim, LG. sipp.] 1. To smile in a silly,
affected, or conceited manner.

    Behold yond simpering dame.


Shak.

    With a made countenance about her mouth, between simpering and
    smiling.


ir. P. Sidney.

2. To glimmer; to twinkle. [Obs.]

    Yet can I mark how stars above Simper and shine.


Herbert.

Sim"per, n. A constrained, self- conscious smile; an affected, silly
smile; a smirk.

    The conscious simper, and the jealous leer.


Pope.

Sim"per*er (?), n. One who simpers. Sir W. Scott.

    A simperer that a court affords.


T. Nevile.

Sim"per*ing, a. &. n. from Simper, v.

Sim"per*ing*ly, adv. In a simpering manner.

Sim"ple (?), a. [Compar. Simpler (?); superl. Simplest.] [F., fr. L.
simplus, or simplex, gen. simplicis. The first part of the Latin words
is probably akin to E. same, and the sense, one, one and the same; cf.
L. semel once, singuli one to each, single. Cg. Single, a., Same, a.,
and for the last part of the word cf. Double, Complex.] 1. Single; not
complex; not infolded or entangled; uncombined; not compounded; not
blended with something else; not complicated; as, a simple substance; a
simple idea; a simple sound; a simple machine; a simple problem; simple
tasks.

2. Plain; unadorned; as, simple dress. "Simple truth." Spenser. "His
simple story." Burns.

3. Mere; not other than; being only.

    A medicine . . . whose simple touch Is powerful to araise King
    Pepin.


Shak.

4. Not given to artifice, stratagem, or duplicity; undesigning;
sincere; true.

    Full many fine men go upon my score, as simple as I stand here, and
    I trust them.


Marston.

    Must thou trust Tradition's simple tongue?


Byron.

    To be simple is to be great.


Emerson.

5. Artless in manner; unaffected; unconstrained; natural;
inartificial;; straightforward.

    In simple manners all the secret lies.


Young.

6. Direct; clear; intelligible; not abstruse or enigmatical; as, a
simple statement; simple language.

7. Weak in intellect; not wise or sagacious; of but moderate
understanding or attainments; hence, foolish; silly. "You have simple
wits." Shak.

    The simple believeth every word; but the prudent man looketh well
    to his going.


Prov. xiv. 15.

8. Not luxurious; without much variety; plain; as, a simple diet; a
simple way of living.

    Thy simple fare and all thy plain delights.


Cowper.

9. Humble; lowly; undistinguished.

    A simple husbandman in garments gray.


Spenser.

    Clergy and laity, male and female, gentle and simple made the fuel
    of the same fire.


Fuller.

10. (BOt.) Without subdivisions; entire; as, a simple stem; a simple
leaf.

11. (Chem.) Not capable of being decomposed into anything more simple
or ultimate by any means at present known; elementary; thus, atoms are
regarded as simple bodies. Cf. Ultimate, a.

A simple body is one that has not as yet been decomposed. There are
indications that many of our simple elements are still compound bodies,
though their actual decomposition into anything simpler may never be
accomplished.

12. (Min.) Homogenous.

13. (Zoöl.) Consisting of a single individual or zooid; as, a simple
ascidian; -- opposed to compound.

Simple contract (Law), any contract, whether verbal or written, which
is not of record or under seal. J. W. Smith. Chitty. -- Simple equation
(Alg.), an equation containing but one unknown quantity, and that
quantity only in the first degree. -- Simple eye (Zoöl.), an eye having
a single lens; -- opposed to compound eye. -- Simple interest. See
under Interest. -- Simple larceny. (Law) See under Larceny. -- Simple
obligation (Rom. Law), an obligation which does not depend for its
execution upon any event provided for by the parties, or is not to
become void on the happening of any such event. Burrill.

Syn. -- Single; uncompounded; unmingled; unmixed; mere; uncombined;
elementary; plain; artless; sincere; harmless; undesigning; frank;
open; unaffected; inartificial; unadorned; credulous; silly; foolish;
shallow; unwise. -- Simple, Silly. One who is simple is sincere,
unaffected, and inexperienced in duplicity, -- hence liable to be
duped. A silly person is one who is ignorant or weak and also self-
confident; hence, one who shows in speech and act a lack of good sense.
Simplicity is incompatible with duplicity, artfulness, or vanity, while
silliness is consistent with all three. Simplicity denotes lack of
knowledge or of guile; silliness denotes want of judgment or right
purpose, a defect of character as well as of education.

    I am a simple woman, much too weak To oppose your cunning.


Shak.

    He is the companion of the silliest people in their most silly
    pleasure; he is ready for every impertinent entertainment and
    diversion.


Law.

Sim"ple (?), n. [F. See Simple, a.] 1. Something not mixed or
compounded. "Compounded of many simples." Shak.

2. (Med.) A medicinal plant; -- so called because each vegetable was
supposed to possess its particular virtue, and therefore to constitute
a simple remedy.

    What virtue is in this remedy lies in the naked simple itself as it
    comes over from the Indies.


Sir W. Temple.

3. (Weaving) (a) A drawloom. (b) A part of the apparatus for raising
the heddles of a drawloom.

4. (R. C. Ch.) A feast which is not a double or a semidouble.

Sim"ple, v. i. To gather simples, or medicinal plants.

    As simpling on the flowery hills she [Circe] strayed.


Garth.

Sim"ple-heart`ed (?), a. Sincere; inguenuous; guileless. Sir W. Scott.

Sim"ple-mind`ed (?), a. Artless; guileless; simple-hearted;
undesigning; unsuspecting; devoid of duplicity. Blackstone. --
Sim"ple-mind`ed*ness, n.

Sim"ple*ness, n. The quality or state of being simple; simplicity.
Shak.

Sim"pler (?), n. One who collects simples, or medicinal plants; a
herbalist; a simplist.

Simpler's joy. (Bot.) Vervain.

Sim"pless (?), n. [F. simplesse.] Simplicity; silliness. [Obs.]
Spenser.

Sim"ple*ton (?), n. [Cf. F. simplet, It. semplicione.] A person of weak
intellect; a silly person.

Sim*pli"cian (?), n. [Cf. OF. simplicien.] One who is simple. [Obs.]
Arnway.

Sim*plic"i*ty (?), n. [F. simplicité, L. simplicitas. See Simple.] 1.
The quality or state of being simple, unmixed, or uncompounded; as, the
simplicity of metals or of earths.

2. The quality or state of being not complex, or of consisting of few
parts; as, the simplicity of a machine.

3. Artlessness of mind; freedom from cunning or duplicity; lack of
acuteness and sagacity.

    Marquis Dorset, a man, for his harmless simplicity neither misliked
    nor much regarded.


Hayward.

    In wit a man; simplicity a child.


Pope.

4. Freedom from artificial ornament, pretentious style, or luxury;
plainness; as, simplicity of dress, of style, or of language;
simplicity of diet; simplicity of life.

5. Freedom from subtlety or abstruseness; clearness; as, the simplicity
of a doctrine; the simplicity of an explanation or a demonstration.

6. Weakness of intellect; silliness; folly.

    How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners
    delight in their scorning?


Prov. i. 22.

Sim`pli*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. simplification.] The act of
simplifying. A. Smith.

Sim"pli*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Simplified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Simplifying (?).] [Cf. F. simplifier, LL. simplificare. See Simple, and
-fy.] To make simple; to make less complex; to make clear by giving the
explanation for; to show an easier or shorter process for doing or
making.

    The collection of duties is drawn to a point, and so far
    simplified.


A. Hamilton.

    It is important, in scientific pursuits, to be caitious in
    simplifying our deductions.


W. Nicholson.

Sim"plist (?), n. One skilled in simples, or medicinal plants; a
simpler. Sir T. Browne.

Sim*plis"tic (?), a. Of or pertaining to simples, or a simplist. [R.]
Wilkinson.

Sim"pli*ty (?), n. Simplicity. [Obs.]

Sim"plo*ce (?), n. (Gram.) See Symploce.

Sim"ply (?), adv. 1. In a simple manner or state; considered in or by
itself; without addition; along; merely; solely; barely.

    [They] make that now good or evil, . . . which otherwise of itself
    were not simply the one or the other.


Hooker.

    Simply the thing I am Shall make me live.


Shak.

<! p. 1343 !>

2. Plainly; without art or subtlety.

    Subverting worldly strong and worldly wise By simply meek.


Milton.

3. Weakly; foolishly. Johnson.

{ Sim"u*la`cher, Sim"u*la`chre } (?), n. [Cf. F. simulacre.] See
Simulacrum. [Obs.]

||Sim`u*la"crum (?), n.; pl. Simulacra (#). [L. See Simulate.] A
||likeness; a semblance; a mock appearance; a sham; -- now usually in a
||derogatory sense.

    Beneath it nothing but a great simulacrum.


Thackeray.

Sim"u*lar (?), n. [Cf. L. simulator, F. simulateur. See Simulate.] One
who pretends to be what he is not; one who, or that which, simulates or
counterfeits something; a pretender. [Obs.] Shak.

    Christ calleth the Pharisees hypocrites, that is to say, simulars,
    and painted sepulchers.


Tyndale.

Sim"u*lar, a. False; specious; counterfeit. [R. & Obs.] "Thou simular
man of virtue." Shak.

Sim"u*late (?), a. [L. simulatus, p. p. of simulare to simulate; akin
to simul at the same time, together, similis like. See Similar, and cf.
Dissemble, Semblance.] Feigned; pretended. Bale.

Sim"u*late (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Simulated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Simulating.] To assume the mere appearance of, without the reality; to
assume the signs or indications of, falsely; to counterfeit; to feign.

    The Puritans, even in the depths of the dungeons to which she had
    sent them, prayed, and with no simulated fervor, that she might be
    kept from the dagger of the assassin.


Macaulay.

Sim`u*la"tion (?), n. [F. simulation, L. simulatio.] The act of
simulating, or assuming an appearance which is feigned, or not true; --
distinguished from dissimulation, which disguises or conceals what is
true.

Syn. -- Counterfeiting; feint; pretense.

Sim"u*la`tor (?), n. [L.] One who simulates, or feigns.  De Quincey.

Sim"u*la*to*ry (?), a. Simulated, or capable of being simulated. Bp.
Hall.

Si`mul*ta*ne"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being simultaneous;
simultaneousness.

Si`mul*ta"ne*ous (?), a. [LL. simultim at the same time, fr. L. simul.
See Simulate.] Existing, happening, or done, at the same time; as,
simultaneous events. -- Si`mul*ta"ne*ous*ly, adv. --
Si`mul*ta"ne*ous*ness, n.

Simultaneous equations (Alg.), two or more equations in which the
values of the unknown quantities entering them are the same at the same
time in both or in all.

Sim"ul*ty (?), n. [L. simultas a hostile encounter, drudge, originally,
a (hostile) coming together, fr. simul together: cf. OF. simulté.]
Private grudge or quarrel; as, domestic simulties. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Sin (?), adv., prep., & conj. Old form of Since. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. &
Scot.]

    Sin that his lord was twenty year of age.


Chaucer.

Sin, n. [OE. sinne, AS. synn, syn; akin to D. zonde, OS. sundia, OHG.
sunta, G. sünde, Icel., Dan. & Sw. synd, L. sons, sontis, guilty,
perhaps originally from the p. pr. of the verb signifying, to be, and
meaning, the one who it is. Cf. Authentic, Sooth.] 1. Transgression of
the law of God; disobedience of the divine command; any violation of
God's will, either in purpose or conduct; moral deficiency in the
character; iniquity; as, sins of omission and sins of commission.

    Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin.


John viii. 34.

    Sin is the transgression of the law.


1 John iii. 4.

    I think 't no sin. To cozen him that would unjustly win.


Shak.

    Enthralled By sin to foul, exorbitant desires.


Milton.

2. An offense, in general; a violation of propriety; a misdemeanor; as,
a sin against good manners.

    I grant that poetry's a crying sin.


Pope.

3. A sin offering; a sacrifice for sin.

    He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin.


2 Cor. v. 21.

4. An embodiment of sin; a very wicked person. [R.]

    Thy ambition, Thou scarlet sin, robbed this bewailing land Of noble
    Buckingham.


Shak.

Sin is used in the formation of some compound words of obvious
signification; as, sin-born; sin-bred, sin-oppressed, sin-polluted, and
the like.

Actual sin, Canonical sins, Original sin, Venial sin. See under Actual,
Canonical, etc. -- Deadly, or Mortal, sins (R. C. Ch.), willful and
deliberate transgressions, which take away divine grace; -- in
distinction from vental sins. The seven deadly sins are pride,
covetousness, lust, wrath, gluttony, envy, and sloth. -- Sin eater, a
man who (according to a former practice in England) for a small
gratuity ate a piece of bread laid on the chest of a dead person,
whereby he was supposed to have taken the sins of the dead person upon
himself. -- Sin offering, a sacrifice for sin; something offered as an
expiation for sin.

Syn. -- Iniquity; wickedness; wrong. See Crime.

Sin, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sinned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sinning.] [OE.
sinnen, singen, sinegen, AS. syngian. See Sin, n.] 1. To depart
voluntarily from the path of duty prescribed by God to man; to violate
the divine law in any particular, by actual transgression or by the
neglect or nonobservance of its injunctions; to violate any known rule
of duty; -- often followed by against.

    Against thee, thee only, have I sinned.


Ps. li. 4.

    All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.


Rom. iii. 23.

2. To violate human rights, law, or propriety; to commit an offense; to
trespass; to transgress.

    I am a man More sinned against than sinning.


Shak.

    Who but wishes to invert the laws Of order, sins against the
    eternal cause.


Pope.

{ Si*na"ic (?), Si`na*it"ic (?), } a. [From Mount Sinai.] Of or
pertaining to Mount Sinai; given or made at Mount Sinai; as, the
Sinaitic law.

Sinaitic manuscript, a fourth century Greek manuscript of the part
Bible, discovered at Mount Sinai (the greater part of it in 1859) by
Tisschendorf, a German Biblical critic; -- called also Codex
Sinaiticus.

Sin*al"bin (?), n. [From L. Sinapis + alba.] (Chem.) A glucoside found
in the seeds of white mustard (Brassica alba, formerly Sinapis alba),
and extracted as a white crystalline substance.

Sin*am"ine (?), n. [Sinapis + melamine.] (Chem.) A bitter white
crystalline nitrogenous substance, obtained indirectly from oil of
mustard and ammonia; -- called also allyl melamine.

Sin"a*pate (?), n. (Chem.) A salt of sinapic acid.

Sin"a*pic (?), a. (Chem.) Of or pertaining to sinapine; specifically,
designating an acid (C11H12O5) related to gallic acid, and obtained by
the decomposition of sinapine, as a white crystalline substance.

Sin"a*pine (?), n. [L. sinapi, sinapis, mustard, Gr. &?;&?;&?;: cf. F.
sinapine.] (Chem.) An alkaloid occuring in the seeds of mustard. It is
extracted, in combination with sulphocyanic acid, as a white
crystalline substance, having a hot, bitter taste. When sinapine is
isolated it is unstable and undergoes decomposition.

||Si*na"pis (?), n. [L.] (Bot.) A disused generic name for mustard; --
||now called Brassica.

Sin"a*pis`in (?), n. (Chem.) A substance extracted from mustard seed
and probably identical with sinalbin. [Obs.]

Sin"a*pism (?), n. [L. sinapismus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, the use of a
mustard blister, fr. &?;&?;&?; to apply a mustard blister, fr.
&?;&?;&?;&?; mustard.] (Med.) A plaster or poultice composed
principally of powdered mustard seed, or containing the volatile oil of
mustard seed. It is a powerful irritant.

Sin`a*po*le"ic (?), a. [Sinapis + oleic.] (Chem.) Of or pertaining to
mustard oil; specifically, designating an acid of the oleic acid series
said to occur in mistard oil.

Si*nap"o*line (?), n. [Sinapis + L. oleum oil.] (Chem.) A nitrogenous
base, CO.(NH.C3H5)2, related to urea, extracted from mustard oil, and
also produced artifically, as a white crystalline substance; -- called
also diallyl urea.

Sin"ca*line (?), n. [So called because obtained by the action of
alkalies on sinapine.] (Chem.) Choline. [Written also sinkaline.]

Since (sns), adv. [For sins, contr. fr. OE. sithens, sithenes, formed
by an adverbial ending (cf. Besides) from OE. sithen, also shortened
into sithe, sin, AS. siððan, syððan, seoððan, afterward, then, since,
after; properly, after that; fr. sð after, later, adv. and prep.
(originally a comparative adv., akin to OS. sð afterward, since, OHG.
sd, G. seit since, Goth. seiþus late, ni þanaseiþs no longer) + ðon
instrumental of the demonstrative and article. See That.] 1. From a
definite past time until now; as, he went a month ago, and I have not
seen him since. [1913 Webster]

    We since become the slaves to one man's lust.


B. Jonson.

2. In the time past, counting backward from the present; before this or
now; ago.

    How many ages since has Virgil writ?


Roscommon.

    About two years since, it so fell out, that he was brought to a
    great lady's house.


Sir P. Sidney.

3. When or that. [Obs.]

    Do you remember since we lay all night in the windmill in St.
    George's field?


Shak.

Since, prep. From the time of; in or during the time subsequent to;
subsequently to; after; -- usually with a past event or time for the
object.

    The Lord hath blessed thee, since my coming.


Gen. xxx. 30.

    I have a model by which he build a nobler poem than any extant
    since the ancients.


Dryden.

Since, conj. Seeing that; because; considering; -- formerly followed by
that.

    Since that my penitence comes after all, Imploring pardon.


Shak.

    Since truth and constancy are vain, Since neither love, nor sense
    of pain, Nor force of reason, can persuade, Then let example be
    obeyed.


Granville.

Syn. -- Because; for; as; inasmuch as; considering. See Because.

Sin*cere" (?), a. [Compar. Sincerer (?); superl. Sincerest.] [L.
sincerus, of uncertain origin; the first part perhaps akin to sin- in
singuli (see Single), and the second to cernere to separate (cf.
Discern): cf. F. sincère.] 1. Pure; unmixed; unadulterated.

    There is no sincere acid in any animal juice.


Arbuthnot.

    A joy which never was sincere till now.


Dryden.

2. Whole; perfect; unhurt; uninjured. [Obs.]

    The inviolable body stood sincere.


Dryden.

3. Being in reality what it appears to be; having a character which
corresponds with the appearance; not falsely assumed; genuine; true;
real; as, a sincere desire for knowledge; a sincere contempt for
meanness.

    A sincere intention of pleasing God in all our actions.


Law.

4. Honest; free from hypocrisy or dissimulation; as, a sincere friend;
a sincere person.

    The more sincere you are, the better it will fare with you at the
    great day of account.


Waterland.

Syn. -- Honest; unfeigned; unvarnished; real; true; unaffected;
inartificial; frank; upright. See Hearty.

Sin*cere"ly, adv. In a sincere manner. Specifically: (a) Purely;
without alloy. Milton. (b) Honestly; unfeignedly; without
dissimulation; as, to speak one's mind sincerely; to love virtue
sincerely.

Sin*cere"ness, n. Same as Sincerity. Beau. & Fl.

Sin*cer"i*ty (?), n. [L. sinceritas: cf. F. sincérité.] The quality or
state of being sincere; honesty of mind or intention; freedom from
simulation, hypocrisy, disguise, or false pretense; sincereness.

    I protest, in the sincerity of love.


Shak.

    Sincerity is a duty no less plain than important.


Knox.

Sinch (?), n. [See Cinch.] A saddle girth made of leather, canvas,
woven horsehair, or woven grass. [Western U.S.]

Sinch, v. t. To gird with a sinch; to tighten the sinch or girth of (a
saddle); as, to sinch up a sadle. [Western U.S.]

Sin*cip"i*tal (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sinciput; being
in the region of the sinciput.

Sin"ci*put (?), n. [L., half a head; semihalf + caput the head.] 1.
(Anat.) The fore part of the head.

2. (Zoöl.) The part of the head of a bird between the base of the bill
and the vertex.

Sin"don (?), n. [L., a kind of fine Indian cotton stuff, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;.] 1. A wrapper. [Obs.] "Wrapped in sindons of linen." Bacon.

2. (Surg.) A small rag or pledget introduced into the hole in the
cranium made by a trephine. Dunglison.

Sine (?), n. [LL. sinus a sine, L. sinus bosom, used in translating the
Ar. jaib, properly, bosom, but probably read by mistake (the consonants
being the same) for an original jba sine, from Skr. jva bowstring,
chord of an arc, sine.] (Trig.) (a) The length of a perpendicular drawn
from one extremity of an arc of a circle to the diameter drawn through
the other extremity. (b) The perpendicular itself. See Sine of angle,
below.

Artificial sines, logarithms of the natural sines, or logarithmic
sines. -- Curve of sines. See Sinusoid. -- Natural sines, the decimals
expressing the values of the sines, the radius being unity. -- Sine of
an angle, in a circle whose radius is unity, the sine of the arc that
measures the angle; in a right-angled triangle, the side opposite the
given angle divided by the hypotenuse. See Trigonometrical function,
under Function. -- Versed sine, that part of the diameter between the
sine and the arc.

||Si"ne (?), prep. [L.] Without.

Si"ne*cu`ral (?), a. Of or pertaining to a sinecure; being in the
nature of a sinecure.

Si`ne*cure (?), n. [L. sine without + cura care, LL., a cure. See
Cure.] 1. An ecclesiastical benefice without the care of souls.
Ayliffe.

2. Any office or position which requires or involves little or no
responsibility, labor, or active service.

    A lucrative sinecure in the Excise.


Macaulay.

Si"ne*cure, v. t. To put or place in a sinecure.

Si"ne*cu*rism (?), n. The state of having a sinecure.

Si"ne*cu*rist (?), n. One who has a sinecure.

Sin"ew (?), n. [OE. sinewe, senewe, AS. sinu, seonu; akin to D. zenuw,
OHG. senawa, G. sehne, Icel. sin, Sw. sena, Dan. sene; cf. Skr. snva.
&radic;290.]

1. (Anat.) A tendon or tendonous tissue. See Tendon.

2. Muscle; nerve. [R.] Sir J. Davies.

3. Fig.: That which supplies strength or power.

    The portion and sinew of her fortune, her marriage dowry.


Shak.

    The bodies of men, munition, and money, may justly be called the
    sinews of war.


Sir W. Raleigh.

Money alone is often called the sinews of war.

Sin"ew, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sinewed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sinewing.] To
knit together, or make strong with, or as with, sinews. Shak.

    Wretches, now stuck up for long tortures . . . might, if properly
    treated, serve to sinew the state in time of danger.


Goldsmith.

Sin"ewed (?), a. 1. Furnished with sinews; as, a strong-sinewed youth.

2. Fig.: Equipped; strengthened.

    When he sees Ourselves well sinewed to our defense.


Shak.

Sin"ew*i*ness (?), n. Quality of being sinewy.

Sin"ew*ish, a. Sinewy. [Obs.] Holinshed.

Sin"ew*less, a. Having no sinews; hence, having no strength or vigor.

Sin"ew*ous (?), a. Sinewy. [Obs.] Holinshed.

Sin"ew-shrunk` (?), a. (Far.) Having the sinews under the belly shrunk
by excessive fatigue.

Sin"ew*y (?), a. 1. Pertaining to, consisting of, or resembling, a
sinew or sinews.

    The sinewy thread my brain lets fall.


Donne.

2. Well braced with, or as if with, sinews; nervous; vigorous; strong;
firm; tough; as, the sinewy Ajax.

    A man whose words . . . were so close and sinewy.


Hare.

Sin"ful (?), a. [AAS. synfull.] Tainted with, or full of, sin; wicked;
iniquitous; criminal; unholy; as, sinful men; sinful thoughts. Piers
Plowman.

    Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity.


Isa. i. 4.

-- Sin"ful*ly, adv. -- Sin"ful*ness, n.

Sing (?), v. i. [imp. Sung (?) or Sang (&?;); p. p. Sung; p. pr. & vb.
n. Singing.] [AS. singan; akin to D. zingen, OS. & OHG. singan, G.
singen, Icel. syngja, Sw. sjunga, Dan. synge, Goth. siggwan, and
perhaps to E. say, v.t., or cf. Gr. &?;&?;&?; voice. Cf. Singe, Song.]
1. To utter sounds with musical inflections or melodious modulations of
voice, as fancy may dictate, or according to the notes of a song or
tune, or of a given part (as alto, tenor, etc.) in a chorus or
concerted piece.

    The noise of them that sing do I hear.


Ex. xxxii. 18.

2. To utter sweet melodious sounds, as birds do.

    On every bough the briddes heard I sing.


Chaucer.

    Singing birds, in silver cages hung.


Dryden.

3. To make a small, shrill sound; as, the air sings in passing through
a crevice.

    O'er his head the flying spear Sang innocent, and spent its force
    in air.


Pope.

4. To tell or relate something in numbers or verse; to celebrate
something in poetry. Milton.

    Bid her . . . sing Of human hope by cross event destroyed.


Prior.

<! p. 1344 !>

5. To cry out; to complain. [Obs.]

    They should sing if thet they were bent.


Chaucer.

Sing (?), v. t. 1. To utter with musical inflections or modulations of
voice.

    And they sing the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song
    of the Lamb.


Rev. xv. 3.

    And in the darkness sing your carol of high praise.


Keble.

2. To celebrate is song; to give praises to in verse; to relate or
rehearse in numbers, verse, or poetry. Milton.

    Arms and the man I sing.


Dryden.

    The last, the happiest British king, Whom thou shalt paint or I
    shall sing.


Addison.

3. To influence by singing; to lull by singing; as, to sing a child to
sleep.

4. To accompany, or attend on, with singing.

    I heard them singing home the bride.


Longfellow.

Singe (snj), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Singed (snjd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Singeing (snj"ng).] [OE. sengen, AS. sengan in besengan (akin to D.
zengen, G. sengen), originally, to cause to sing, fr. AS. singan to
sing, in allusion to the singing or hissing sound often produced when a
substance is singed, or slightly burned. See Sing.] 1. To burn slightly
or superficially; to burn the surface of; to burn the ends or outside
of; as, to singe the hair or the skin.

    You sulphurous and thought-executing fires, . . . Singe my white
    head!


Shak.

    I singed the toes of an ape through a burning glass.


L'Estrange.

2. (a) To remove the nap of (cloth), by passing it rapidly over a
red-hot bar, or over a flame, preliminary to dyeing it. (b) To remove
the hair or down from (a plucked chicken or the like) by passing it
over a flame.

Singe, n. A burning of the surface; a slight burn.

Sin"ger (sn"jr), n. [From Singe.] One who, or that which, singes.
Specifically: (a) One employed to singe cloth. (b) A machine for
singeing cloth.

Sing"er (?), n. [From Sing.] One who sings; especially, one whose
profession is to sing.

Sing"er*ess, n. A songstress. [Obs.] Wyclif.

Sin`gha*lese" (?), n. & a. [Skr. Sihala Ceylon.] (Ethnol.) Same as
Cingalese.

Sing"ing (?), a. & n. from Sing, v.

Singing bird. (Zoöl.) (a) Popularly, any bird that sings; a song bird.
(b) Specifically, any one of the Oscines. -- Singing book, a book
containing music for singing; a book of tunes. -- Singing falcon or
hawk. (Zoöl.) See Chanting falcon, under Chanting. -- Singing fish
(Zoöl.), a California toadfish (Porichthys porosissimus). -- Singing
flame (Acoustics), a flame, as of hydrogen or coal gas, burning within
a tube and so adjusted as to set the air within the tube in vibration,
causing sound. The apparatus is called also chemical harmonicon. --
Singing master, a man who teaches vocal music. -- Singing school, a
school in which persons are instructed in singing.

Sing"ing*ly, adv. With sounds like singing; with a kind of tune; in a
singing tone. G. North (1575).

Sin"gle (?), a. [L. singulus, a dim. from the root in simplex simple;
cf. OE. & OF. sengle, fr. L. singulus. See Simple, and cf. Singular.]
1. One only, as distinguished from more than one; consisting of one
alone; individual; separate; as, a single star.

    No single man is born with a right of controlling the opinions of
    all the rest.


Pope.

2. Alone; having no companion.

    Who single hast maintained, Against revolted multitudes, the cause
    Of truth.


Milton.

3. Hence, unmarried; as, a single man or woman.

    Grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.


Shak.

    Single chose to live, and shunned to wed.


Dryden.

4. Not doubled, twisted together, or combined with others; as, a single
thread; a single strand of a rope.

5. Performed by one person, or one on each side; as, a single combat.

    These shifts refuted, answer thy appellant, . . . Who now defles
    thee thrice ti single fight.


Milton.

6. Uncompounded; pure; unmixed.

    Simple ideas are opposed to complex, and single to compound.


I. Watts.

7. Not deceitful or artful; honest; sincere.

    I speak it with a single heart.


Shak.

8. Simple; not wise; weak; silly. [Obs.]

    He utters such single matter in so infantly a voice.


Beau. & Fl.

Single ale, beer, or drink, small ale, etc., as contrasted with double
ale, etc., which is stronger. [Obs.] Nares. -- Single bill (Law), a
written engagement, generally under seal, for the payment of money,
without a penalty. Burril. -- Single court (Lawn Tennis), a court laid
out for only two players. -- Single-cut file. See the Note under 4th
File. -- Single entry. See under Bookkeeping. -- Single file. See under
1st File. -- Single flower (Bot.), a flower with but one set of petals,
as a wild rose. -- Single knot. See Illust. under Knot. -- Single whip
(Naut.), a single rope running through a fixed block.

Sin"gle, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Singled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Singling
(?).] 1. To select, as an individual person or thing, from among a
number; to choose out from others; to separate.

    Dogs who hereby can single out their master in the dark.


Bacon.

    His blood! she faintly screamed her mind Still singling one from
    all mankind.


More.

2. To sequester; to withdraw; to retire. [Obs.]

    An agent singling itself from consorts.


Hooker.

3. To take alone, or one by one.

    Men . . . commendable when they are singled.


Hooker.

Sin"gle, v. i. To take the irrregular gait called single-foot;- said of
a horse. See Single- foot.

    Many very fleet horses, when overdriven, adopt a disagreeable gait,
    which seems to be a cross between a pace and a trot, in which the
    two legs of one side are raised almost but not quite,
    simultaneously. Such horses are said to single, or to be
    single-footed.


W. S. Clark.

Sin"gle, n. 1. A unit; one; as, to score a single.

2. pl. The reeled filaments of silk, twisted without doubling to give
them firmness.

3. A handful of gleaned grain. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

4. (Law Tennis) A game with but one player on each side; -- usually in
the plural.

5. (Baseball) A hit by a batter which enables him to reach first base
only.

Sin"gle-act`ing (?), a. Having simplicity of action; especially
(Mach.), acting or exerting force during strokes in one direction only;
-- said of a reciprocating engine, pump, etc.

Sin"gle-breast`ed (?), a. Lapping over the breast only far enough to
permit of buttoning, and having buttons on one edge only; as, a
single-breasted coast.

Sin"gle-foot` (?), n. An irregular gait of a horse; -- called also
single-footed pace. See Single, v. i.

    Single-foot is an irregular pace, rather rare, distinguished by the
    posterior extremities moving in the order of a fast walk, and the
    anterior extremities in that of a slow trot.


Stillman (The Horse in Motion.)

Sin"gle-hand"ed (?), a. Having but one hand, or one workman; also,
alone; unassisted.

Sin"gle-heart"ed (?), a. Having an honest heart; free from duplicity.
-- Sin"gle- heart"ed*ly, adv.

Sin"gle-mind"ed (?), a. Having a single purpose; hence, artless;
guileless; single-hearted.

Sin"gle*ness, n. 1. The quality or state of being single, or separate
from all others; the opposite of doubleness, complication, or
multiplicity.

2. Freedom from duplicity, or secondary and selfish ends; purity of
mind or purpose; simplicity; sincerity; as, singleness of purpose;
singleness of heart.

Sin"gles (?), n. pl. See Single, n., 2.

Sin"gle*stick` (?), n. (a) In England and Scotland, a cudgel used in
fencing or fighting; a backsword. (b) The game played with
singlesticks, in which he who first brings blood from his adversary's
head is pronounced victor; backsword; cudgeling.

Sin"glet (?), n. An unlined or undyed waistcoat; a single garment; --
opposed to doublet. [Prov. Eng.]

Sin"gle*ton (?), n. In certain games at cards, as whist, a single card
of any suit held at the deal by a player; as, to lead a singleton.

Sin"gle*tree` (?), n. [Cf. Swingletree.] The pivoted or swinging bar to
which the traces of a harnessed horse are fixed; a whiffletree.

When two horses draw abreast, a singletree is fixed at each end of
another crosspiece, called the doubletree.

Sin"gly (?), adv. 1. Individually; particularly; severally; as, to make
men singly and personally good.

2. Only; by one's self; alone.

    Look thee, 't is so! Thou singly honest man.


Shak.

3. Without partners, companions, or associates; single-handed; as, to
attack another singly.

    At omber singly to decide their doom.


Pope.

4. Honestly; sincerely; simply. [R.] Johnson.

5. Singularly; peculiarly. [Obs.] Milton.

Sing"-sing` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The kob.

Sing"song` (?), n. 1. Bad singing or poetry.

2. A drawling or monotonous tone, as of a badly executed song.

Sing"song`, a. Drawling; monotonous.

Sing"song`, v. i. To write poor poetry. [R.] Tennyson.

Sing"ster (?), n. A songstress. [Obs.] Wyclif.

Sin"gu*lar (s"g*lr), a. [OE. singuler, F. singulier, fr. L.
singularius, singularis, fr. singulus single. See Single, a.] 1.
Separate or apart from others; single; distinct. [Obs.] Bacon.

    And God forbid that all a company Should rue a singular man's
    folly.


Chaucer.

2. Engaged in by only one on a side; single. [Obs.]

    To try the matter thus together in a singular combat.


Holinshed.

3. (Logic) Existing by itself; single; individual.

    The idea which represents one . . . determinate thing, is called a
    singular idea, whether simple, complex, or compound.


I. Watts.

4. (Law) Each; individual; as, to convey several parcels of land, all
and singular.

5. (Gram.) Denoting one person or thing; as, the singular number; --
opposed to dual and plural.

6. Standing by itself; out of the ordinary course; unusual; uncommon;
strange; as, a singular phenomenon.

    So singular a sadness Must have a cause as strange as the effect.


Denham.

7. Distinguished as existing in a very high degree; rarely equaled;
eminent; extraordinary; exceptional; as, a man of singular gravity or
attainments.

8. Departing from general usage or expectations; odd; whimsical; --
often implying disapproval or censure.

    His zeal None seconded, as out of season judged, Or singular and
    rash.


Milton.

    To be singular in anything that is wise and worthy, is not a
    disparagement, but a praise.


Tillotson.

9. Being alone; belonging to, or being, that of which there is but one;
unique.

    These busts of the emperors and empresses are all very scarce, and
    some of them almost singular in their kind.


Addison.

Singular point in a curve (Math.), a point at which the curve possesses
some peculiar properties not possessed by other points of the curve, as
a cusp point, or a multiple point. -- Singular proposition (Logic), a
proposition having as its subject a singular term, or a common term
limited to an individual by means of a singular sign. Whately. --
Singular succession (Civil Law), division among individual successors,
as distinguished from universal succession, by which an estate
descended in intestacy to the heirs in mass. -- Singular term (Logic),
a term which represents or stands for a single individual.

Syn. -- Unexampled; unprecedented; eminent; extraordinary; remarkable;
uncommon; rare; unusual; peculiar; strange; odd; eccentric; fantastic.

Sin"gu*lar, n. 1. An individual instance; a particular. [Obs.] Dr. H.
More.

2. (Gram) The singular number, or the number denoting one person or
thing; a word in the singular number.

Sin"gu*lar*ist (s"g*lr*st), n. One who affects singularity. [Obs.]

    A clownish singularist, or nonconformist to ordinary usage.


Borrow.

Sin`gu*lar"i*ty (-lr"*t), n.; pl. Singularities (- tz). [L.
singularitas: cf. F. singularité.] 1. The quality or state of being
singular; some character or quality of a thing by which it is
distinguished from all, or from most, others; peculiarity.

    Pliny addeth this singularity to that soil, that the second year
    the very falling down of the seeds yieldeth corn.


Sir. W. Raleigh.

    I took notice of this little figure for the singularity of the
    instrument.


Addison.

2. Anything singular, rare, or curious.

    Your gallery Have we passed through, not without much content In
    many singularities.


Shak.

3. Possession of a particular or exclusive privilege, prerogative, or
distinction.

    No bishop of Rome ever took upon him this name of singularity
    [universal bishop].


Hooker.

    Catholicism . . . must be understood in opposition to the legal
    singularity of the Jewish nation.


Bp. Pearson.

4. Celibacy. [Obs.] Jer. Taylor.

Sin"gu*lar*ize (s"g*lr*z), v. t. To make singular or single; to
distinguish. [R.]

Sin"gu*lar*ly, adv. 1. In a singular manner; in a manner, or to a
degree, not common to others; extraordinarily; as, to be singularly
exact in one's statements; singularly considerate of others.
"Singularly handsome." Milman.

2. Strangely; oddly; as, to behave singularly.

3. So as to express one, or the singular number.

Sin"gult (?), n.[L. singultus.] A sigh or sobbing; also, a hiccough.
[Obs.] Spenser. W. Browne.

Sin*gul"tous (?), a. (Med.) Relating to, or affected with, hiccough.
Dunglison.

||Sin*gul"tus (?), n. [L.] (Med.) Hiccough.

Sin"i*cal (?), a. [From Sine.] (Trig.) Of or pertaining to a sine;
employing, or founded upon, sines; as, a sinical quadrant.

Sin"i*grin (?), n. [From NL. Sinapis nigra.] (Chem.) A glucoside found
in the seeds of black mustard (Brassica nigra, formerly Sinapis nigra)
It resembles sinalbin, and consists of a potassium salt of myronic
acid.

Sin"is*ter (sn"s*tr; 277), a. [Accented on the middle syllable by the
older poets, as Shakespeare, Milton, Dryden.] [L. sinister: cf. F.
sinistre.] 1. On the left hand, or the side of the left hand; left; --
opposed to dexter, or right. "Here on his sinister cheek." Shak.

    My mother's blood Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
    Bounds in my father's


Shak.

In heraldy the sinister side of an escutcheon is the side which would
be on the left of the bearer of the shield, and opposite the right hand
of the beholder.

2. Unlucky; inauspicious; disastrous; injurious; evil; -- the left
being usually regarded as the unlucky side; as, sinister influences.

    All the several ills that visit earth, Brought forth by night, with
    a sinister birth.


B. Jonson.

3. Wrong, as springing from indirection or obliquity; perverse;
dishonest; corrupt; as, sinister aims.

    Nimble and sinister tricks and shifts.


Bacon.

    He scorns to undermine another's interest by any sinister or
    inferior arts.


South.

    He read in their looks . . . sinister intentions directed
    particularly toward himself.


Sir W. Scott.

4. Indicative of lurking evil or harm; boding covert danger; as, a
sinister countenance.

Bar sinister. (Her.) See under Bar, n. -- Sinister aspect (Astrol.), an
appearance of two planets happening according to the succession of the
signs, as Saturn in Aries, and Mars in the same degree of Gemini. --
Sinister base, Sinister chief. See under Escutcheon.

Sin"is*ter-hand"ed (?), a. Left- handed; hence, unlucky. [Obs.]
Lovelace.

Sin"is*ter*ly, adv. In a sinister manner. Wood.

Sin"is*trad (?), adv. [L. sinistra the left hand + ad to.] (Anat. &
Zoöl.) Toward the left side; sinistrally.

Sin"is*tral (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to the left, inclining to the
left; sinistrous; -- opposed to dextral.

2. (Zoöl.) Having the whorls of the spire revolving or rising to the
left; reversed; -- said of certain spiral shells.

Sin`is*tral"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being sinistral.

Sin"is*tral*ly (?), adv. Toward the left; in a sinistral manner. J. Le
Conte.

Sin"is*trin (sn"s*trn), n. [L. sinister left.] (Chem.) A mucilaginous
carbohydrate, resembling achroödextrin, extracted from squill as a
colorless amorphous substance; -- so called because it is levorotatory.

Sin`is*tror"sal (?), a. [L. sinistrorsus, sinistroversus, turned toward
the left side; sinister left + vertere, vortere, versum, vorsum, to
turn.] Rising spirally from right to left (of the spectator);
sinistrorse.

Sin"is*trorse` (?), a. [See Sinistrolsal.] Turning to the left (of the
spectator) in the ascending line; -- the opposite of dextrorse. See
Dextrorse.

Sin"is*trous (?), a. [See Sinister.] 1. Being on the left side;
inclined to the left; sinistral. "Sinistrous gravity." Sir T. Browne.

<! p. 1345 !>

2. Wrong; absurd; perverse.

    A knave or fool can do no harm, even by the most sinistrous and
    absurd choice.


Bentley.

Sin"is*trous*ly (sn"s*trs*l), adv. 1. In a sinistrous manner;
perversely; wrongly; unluckily.

2. With a tendency to use the left hand.

    Many, in their infancy, are sinistrously disposed, and divers
    continue all their life left-handed.


Sir T. Browne.

Sink (sk), v. i. [imp. Sunk (sk), or (Sank (sk)); p. p. Sunk (obs.
Sunken, -- now used as adj.); p. pr. & vb. n. Sinking.] [OE. sinken,
AS. sincan; akin to D. zinken, OS. sincan, G. sinken, Icel. sökkva,
Dan. synke, Sw. sjunka, Goth. siggan, and probably to E. silt. Cf.
Silt.] 1. To fall by, or as by, the force of gravity; to descend lower
and lower; to decline gradually; to subside; as, a stone sinks in
water; waves rise and sink; the sun sinks in the west.

    I sink in deep mire.


Ps. lxix. 2.

2. To enter deeply; to fall or retire beneath or below the surface; to
penetrate.

    The stone sunk into his forehead.


1 San. xvii. 49.

3. Hence, to enter so as to make an abiding impression; to enter
completely.

    Let these sayings sink down into your ears.


Luke ix. 44.

4. To be overwhelmed or depressed; to fall slowly, as so the ground,
from weakness or from an overburden; to fail in strength; to decline;
to decay; to decrease.

    I think our country sinks beneath the yoke.


Shak.

    He sunk down in his chariot.


2 Kings ix. 24.

    Let not the fire sink or slacken.


Mortimer.

5. To decrease in volume, as a river; to subside; to become diminished
in volume or in apparent height.

    The Alps and Pyreneans sink before him.


Addison.

Syn. -- To fall; subside; drop; droop; lower; decline; decay; decrease;
lessen.

Sink, v. t. 1. To cause to sink; to put under water; to immerse or
submerge in a fluid; as, to sink a ship.

    [The Athenians] fell upon the wings and sank a single ship.


Jowett (Thucyd.).

2. Figuratively: To cause to decline; to depress; to degrade; hence, to
ruin irretrievably; to destroy, as by drowping; as, to sink one's
reputation.

    I raise of sink, imprison or set free.


Prior.

    If I have a conscience, let it sink me.


Shak.

    Thy cruel and unnatural lust of power Has sunk thy father more than
    all his years.


Rowe.

3. To make (a depression) by digging, delving, or cutting, etc.; as, to
sink a pit or a well; to sink a die.

4. To bring low; to reduce in quantity; to waste.

    You sunk the river repeated draughts.


Addison.

5. To conseal and appropriate. [Slang]

    If sent with ready money to buy anything, and you happen to be out
    of pocket, sink the money, and take up the goods on account.


Swift.

6. To keep out of sight; to suppress; to ignore.

    A courtly willingness to sink obnoxious truths.


Robertson.

7. To reduce or extinguish by payment; as, to sink the national debt.

Sink, n. 1. A drain to carry off filthy water; a jakes.

2. A shallow box or vessel of wood, stone, iron, or other material,
connected with a drain, and used for receiving filthy water, etc., as
in a kitchen.

3. A hole or low place in land or rock, where waters sink and are lost;
-- called also sink hole. [U. S.]

Sink hole. (a) The opening to a sink drain. (b) A cesspool. (c) Same as
Sink, n., 3.

Sink"er (?), n. One who, or that which, sinks. Specifically: (a) A
weight on something, as on a fish line, to sink it. (b) In knitting
machines, one of the thin plates, blades, or other devices, that
depress the loops upon or between the needles.

Dividing sinker, in knitting machines, a sinker between two jack
sinkers and acting alternately with them. -- Jack sinker. See under
Jack, n. -- Sinker bar. (a) In knitting machines, a bar to which one
set of the sinkers is attached. (b) In deep well boring, a heavy bar
forming a connection between the lifting rope and the boring tools,
above the jars.

Sink"ing, a. & n. from Sink.

Sinking fund. See under Fund. -- Sinking head (Founding), a riser from
which the mold is fed as the casting shrinks. See Riser, n., 4. --
Sinking pump, a pump which can be lowered in a well or a mine shaft as
the level of the water sinks.

Sin"less (?), a. Free from sin. Piers Plowman.

-- Sin"less*ly, adv. -- Sin"less*ness, n.

Sin"ner (?), n. One who has sinned; especially, one who has sinned
without repenting; hence, a persistent and incorrigible transgressor;
one condemned by the law of God.

Sin"ner, v. i. To act as a sinner. [Humorous]

    Whether the charmer sinner it or saint it.


Pope.

Sin"ner*ess, n. A woman who sins. [Obs.]

Sin"net (?), n. See Sennit .

Sin`o*log"ic*al (?), a. [See Sinologue.] Relating to the Chinese
language or literature.

Si*nol"o*gist (?), n. A sinologue.

Sin"o*logue (?), n. [From L. Sinae, an Oriental people mentioned by
Ptolemy, or Ar. Sin China or the Chinese + Gr. &?;&?;&?; discourse;
formed like theologue: cf. F. sinologue.] A student of Chinese; one
versed in the Chinese language, literature, and history.

Si*nol"o*gy (?), n. [Cf. F. sinologie.] That branch of systemized
knowledge which treats of the Chinese, their language, literature, etc.

Sin"o*per (?), n. (Min.) Sinople.

{ Si*no"pi*a (?), Si*no"pis (?), } n. A red pigment made from sinopite.

Sin"o*pite (?), n. [F., fr. L. sinopis (sc. terra), a red earth or
ocher found in Sinope, a town in Paphlagoma, on the Black Sea, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;&?;.] (Min.) A brickred ferruginous clay used by the ancients
for red paint.

Sin"o*ple (?), n. (Min.) Ferruginous quartz, of a blood-red or brownish
red color, sometimes with a tinge of yellow.

Sin"o*ple, n. [F., fr. LL. sinopis. See Sinople a mineral.] (Her.) The
tincture vert; green.

Sinque (?), n. See Cinque. [Obs.] Beau. & Fl.

Sins"ring (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Banxring.

Sin"ter (?), n. [G. Cf. Cinder.] (Min.) Dross, as of iron; the scale
which files from iron when hammered; -- applied as a name to various
minerals.

Calcareous sinter, a loose banded variety of calcite formed by
deposition from lime-bearing waters; calcareous tufa; travertine. --
Ceraunian sinter, fulgurite. -- Siliceous sinter, a light cellular or
fibrous opal; especially, geyserite (see Geyserite). It has often a
pearly luster, and is then called pearl sinter.

{ Sin"to (?), or Sin"tu (?), Sin"to*ism (?), Sin"to*ist }. See Shinto,
etc.

||Sin"toc (?), n. A kind of spice used in the East Indies, consisting
||of the bark of a species of Cinnamomum. [Written also sindoc.]

Sin"u*ate (?), a. [L. sinuatus, p. p. of sinuare to wind, bend, fr.
sinus a bend.] Having the margin alternately curved inward and outward;
having rounded lobes separated by rounded sinuses; sinuous; wavy.

Sin"u*ate (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sinuated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sinuating.] To bend or curve in and out; to wind; to turn; to be
sinuous. Woodward.

Sin"u*a`ted (&?;), a. Same as Sinuate.

Sin`u*a"tion (?), n. [L. sinuatio.] A winding or bending in and out.

Sin"u*ose` (?), a. Sinuous. Loudon.

Sin`u*os"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Sinuosities (#). [Cf. F. sinuosité.] 1.
Quality or state of being sinuous.

2. A bend, or a series of bends and turns; a winding, or a series of
windings; a wave line; a curve.

    A line of coast certainly amounting, with its sinuosities, to more
    than 700 miles.


Sydney Smith.

Sin"u*ous (?), a. [L. sinuosus, fr. sinus a bent surface, a curve: cf.
F. sinueux. See Sinus.] Bending in and out; of a serpentine or
undulating form; winding; crooked. -- Sin"u*ous*ly, adv.

    Streaking the ground with sinuous trace.


Milton.

    Gardens bright with sinuous rills.


Coleridge.

Si`nu*pal"li*ate (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a pallial sinus. See under
Sinus.

Si"nus (?), n.; pl. L. Sinus, E. Sinuses (#). [L., a bent surface, a
curve, the folds or bosom of a garment, etc., a bay. Cf. Sine, n.] 1.
An opening; a hollow; a bending.

2. A bay of the sea; a recess in the shore.

3. (Anat. & Zoöl.) A cavity; a depression. Specifically: (a) A cavity
in a bone or other part, either closed or with a narrow opening. (b) A
dilated vessel or canal.

4. (Med.) A narrow, elongated cavity, in which pus is collected; an
elongated abscess with only a small orifice.

5. (Bot.) A depression between adjoining lobes.

A sinus may be rounded, as in the leaf of the white oak, or acute, as
in that of the red maple.

Pallial sinus. (Zoöl.) See under Pallial. -- Sinus venosus (?). [L.,
venous dilatation.] (Anat.) (a) The main part of the cavity of the
right auricle of the heart in the higher vertebrates. (b) In the lower
vertebrates, a distinct chamber of the heart formed by the union of the
large systematic veins and opening into the auricle.

Si"nus*oid (?), n. [Sinus + - oid.] (Geom.) The curve whose ordinates
are proportional to the sines of the abscissas, the equation of the
curve being y = a sin x. It is also called the curve of sines.

Si`nus*oid"al (?), a. (Geom.) Of or pertaining to a sinusoid; like a
sinusoid.

Sio"goon (?), n. See Shogun.

Sio*goon"ate (?), n. See Shogunate.

Sioux (?), n. sing. & pl. (Ethnol.) See Dakotas.

Sip (sp), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sipped (spt); p. pr. & vb. n. Sipping.]
[OE. sippen; akin to OD. sippen, and AS. span to sip, suck up, drink.
See Sup, v. t.] 1. To drink or imbibe in small quantities; especially,
to take in with the lips in small quantities, as a liquid; as, to sip
tea. "Every herb that sips the dew." Milton.

2. To draw into the mouth; to suck up; as, a bee sips nectar from the
flowers.

3. To taste the liquor of; to drink out of. [Poetic]

    They skim the floods, and sip the purple flowers.


Dryden.

Sip, v. i. To drink a small quantity; to take a fluid with the lips; to
take a sip or sips of something.

    [She] raised it to her mouth with sober grace; Then, sipping,
    offered to the next in place.


Dryden.

Sip, n. 1. The act of sipping; the taking of a liquid with the lips.

2. A small draught taken with the lips; a slight taste.

    One sip of this Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight Beyond
    the bliss of dreams.


Milton.

    A sip is all that the public ever care to take from reservoirs of
    abstract philosophy.


De Quincey.

Sip"age (?), n. See Seepage. [Scot. & U.S.]

Sipe (sp), v. i. See Seep. [Scot. & U.S.]

Siph"i*lis (?), n. (Med.) Syphilis.

Si"phoid (?), n. [L. sipho a siphon + -oid: cf. F. vase siphoïde.] A
siphon bottle. See under Siphon, n.

Si"phon (?), n. [F. siphon, L. sipho, -onis, fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a
siphon, tube, pipe.] 1. A device, consisting of a pipe or tube bent so
as to form two branches or legs of unequal length, by which a liquid
can be transferred to a lower level, as from one vessel to another,
over an intermediate elevation, by the action of the pressure of the
atmosphere in forcing the liquid up the shorter branch of the pipe
immersed in it, while the continued excess of weight of the liquid in
the longer branch (when once filled) causes a continuous flow. The flow
takes place only when the discharging extremity of the pipe ia lower
than the higher liquid surface, and when no part of the pipe is higher
above the surface than the same liquid will rise by atmospheric
pressure; that is, about 33 feet for water, and 30 inches for mercury,
near the sea level.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) One of the tubes or folds of the mantle border of a
bivalve or gastropod mollusk by which water is conducted into the gill
cavity. See Illust. under Mya, and Lamellibranchiata. (b) The anterior
prolongation of the margin of any gastropod shell for the protection of
the soft siphon. (c) The tubular organ through which water is ejected
from the gill cavity of a cephaloid. It serves as a locomotive organ,
by guiding and confining the jet of water. Called also siphuncle. See
Illust. under Loligo, and Dibranchiata. (d) The siphuncle of a
cephalopod shell. (e) The sucking proboscis of certain parasitic
insects and crustaceans. (f) A sproutlike prolongation in front of the
mouth of many gephyreans. (g) A tubular organ connected both with the
esophagus and the intestine of certain sea urchins and annelids.

3. A siphon bottle.

Inverted siphon, a tube bent like a siphon, but having the branches
turned upward; specifically (Hydraulic Engineering), a pipe for
conducting water beneath a depressed place, as from one hill to another
across an intervening valley, following the depression of the ground.
-- Siphon barometer. See under Barometer. -- Siphon bottle, a bottle
for holding aërated water, which is driven out through a bent tube in
the neck by the gas within the bottle when a valve in the tube is
opened; -- called also gazogene, and siphoid. -- Siphon condenser, a
condenser for a steam engine, in which the vacuum is maintained by the
downward flow of water through a vertical pipe of great height. --
Siphon cup, a cup with a siphon attached for carrying off any liquid in
it; specifically (Mach.), an oil cup in which oil is carried over the
edge of a tube in a cotton wick, and so reaches the surface to be
lubricated. -- Siphon gauge. See under Gauge. -- Siphon pump, a jet
pump. See under Jet, n.

Si"phon (?), v. t. (Chem.) To convey, or draw off, by means of a
siphon, as a liquid from one vessel to another at a lower level.

Si"phon*age (?), n. The action of a siphon.

Si"phon*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a siphon; resembling a siphon.

Siphonal stomach (Zoöl.), a stomach which is tubular and bent back upon
itself, like a siphon, as in the salmon.

Si`pho*na"rid (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of
limpet-shaped pulmonate gastropods of the genus Siphonaria. They cling
to rocks between high and low water marks and have both lunglike organs
and gills. -- Si`pho*na"rid, a.

||Si`pho*na"ta (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A tribe of bivalve mollusks in
||which the posterior mantle border is prolonged into two tubes or
||siphons. Called also Siphoniata. See Siphon, 2 (a), and Quahaug.

Si"phon*ate (?), a. 1. Having a siphon or siphons.

2. (Zoöl.) Belonging to the Siphonata.

Si"phon*et (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of the two dorsal tubular organs on the
hinder part of the abdomen of aphids. They give exit to the honeydew.
See Illust. under Aphis.

||Si*pho"ni*a (?), n. [NL.] (Bot.) A former name for a euphorbiaceous
||genus (Hevea) of South American trees, the principal source of
||caoutchouc.

||Si*pho`ni*a"ta (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) Same as Siphonata.

Si*phon"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to a siphon.

Si*phon"i*fer (?), n. [NL., fr. L. sipho, -onis, siphon + ferre to
bear.] (Zoöl.) Any cephalopod having a siphonate shell.

Si"phon*if"er*ous (?), a. [Siphon + -ferous.] (Zoöl.) Siphon-bearing,
as the shell of the nautilus and other cephalopods.

||Si*pho"ni*um (?), n.; pl. Siphonia (#). [NL., from Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;,
||dim. of &?;&?;&?;&?;. See Siphon.] (Anat.) A bony tube which, in some
||birds, connects the tympanium with the air chambers of the articular
||piece of the mandible.

||Si`pho*no*bran`chi*a"ta (?), n. pl. [NL. See Siphon, and Branchia.]
||(Zoöl.) A tribe of gastropods having the mantle border, on one or
||both sides, prolonged in the form of a spout through which water
||enters the gill cavity. The shell itself is not always
||siphonostomatous in this group.

<! p. 1346 !>

Si`pho*no*bran"chi*ate (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a siphon, or siphons, to
convey water to the gills; belonging or pertaining to the
Siphonobranchiata. -- n. One of the Siphonobranchiata.

Si`pho*nog"ly*phe (?), n. [Siphon + Gr. &?;&?;&?; to engrave.] (Zoöl.)
A gonidium.

||Si`pho*noph"o*ra (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a siphon +
||&?;&?;&?;&?; to bear.] (Zoöl.) An order of pelagic Hydrozoa including
||species which form complex free-swimming communities composed of
||numerous zooids of various kinds, some of which act as floats or as
||swimming organs, others as feeding or nutritive zooids, and others as
||reproductive zooids. See Illust. under Physallia, and Porpita.

Si`pho*noph"o*ran (?), a. (Zoöl.) Belonging to the Siphonophora. -- n.
One of the Siphonophora.

Si*phon"o*phore (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of the Siphonophora.

||Si`pho*nop"o*da (?), n. pl. [NL. See Siphon, and -poda.] (Zoöl.) A
||division of Scaphopoda including those in which the foot terminates
||in a circular disk.

||Si`pho*no*stom"a*ta (?), n. pl. [NL. See Siphon, and Stoma.] (Zoöl.)
||(a) A tribe of parasitic copepod Crustacea including a large number
||of species that are parasites of fishes, as the lerneans. They have a
||mouth adapted to suck blood. (b) An artificial division of gastropods
||including those that have siphonostomatous shells.

Si`pho*no*stom"a*tous (?), a. (Zoöl.) (a) Having the front edge of the
aperture of the shell prolonged in the shape of a channel for the
protection of the siphon; -- said of certain gastropods. (b) Pertaining
to the Siphonostomata.

Si`pho*nos"tome (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; a siphon + &?;&?;&?; mouth.]
(Zoöl.) (a) Any parasitic entomostracan of the tribe Siphonostomata.
(b) A siphonostomatous shell.

Si`pho*rhi"nal (?), a. [Siphon + rhinal.] (Zoöl.) Having tubular
nostrils, as the petrels.

Si`pho*rhin"i*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) A siphorhinal bird.

Si"phun`cle (?), n. [L. siphunculus, sipunculus, dim. of sipho. See
Siphon.] (Zoöl.) The tube which runs through the partitions of
chambered cephalopod shells.

Si"phun`cled (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a siphuncle; siphunculated.

Si*phun"cu*lar (?), a. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the siphuncle.

Si*phun"cu*la`ted (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a siphuncle. Huxley.

Sip"id (?), a. [See Insipid, Sapid.] Having a taste or flavorl savory;
sapid. [Obs.] Cockeram.

Sip"per (?), n. One whi sips.

Sip"pet (?), n. [See Sip, Sop.] A small sop; a small, thin piece of
toasted bread soaked in milk, broth, or the like; a small piece of
toasted or fried bread cut into some special shape and used for
garnishing.

    Your sweet sippets in widows' houses.


Milton.

Sip"ple (?), v. i. [Freq. of sip.] To sip often. [Obs. or Scot.]

Sip"pling (?), a. Sipping often. [Obs.] "Taken after a sippling sort."
Holland.

||Si*pun`cu*la"ce*a (?), n. pl. [NL., from Sipunculus, the typical
||genus. See Siphuncle.] (Zoöl.) A suborder of Gephyrea, including
||those which have the body unarmed and the intestine opening
||anteriorly.

Si*pun"cu*loid (?), a. [NL. Sipunculus, the typical genus + -oid.]
(Zoöl.) Pertaining to the Sipunculoidea. -- n. One of the
Sipunculoidea.

||Si*pun`cu*loi"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) (a) Same as Gephyrea.
||(b) In a restricted sense, same as Sipunculacea.

||Si` quis" (?). [L., if any one (the first words of the notice in
||Latin).] (Ch. of Eng.) A notification by a candidate for orders of
||his intention to inquire whether any impediment may be alleged
||against him.

Sir (?), n. [OE. sire, F. sire, contr. from the nominative L. senior an
elder, elderly person, compar. of senex,senis, an aged person; akin to
Gr. &?;&?;&?; old, Skr. sana, Goth. sineigs old, sinista eldest, Ir. &
Gael. sean old, W. hen. Cf. Seignior, Senate, Seneschal, Senior, Senor,
Signor, Sire, Sirrah.] 1. A man of social authority and dignity; a
lord; a master; a gentleman; -- in this sense usually spelled sire.
[Obs.]

    He was crowned lord and sire.


Gower.

    In the election of a sir so rare.


Shak.

2. A title prefixed to the Christian name of a knight or a baronet.

    Sir Horace Vere, his brother, was the principal in the active part.


Bacon.

3. An English rendering of the LAtin Dominus, the academical title of a
bachelor of arts; -- formerly colloquially, and sometimes
contemptuously, applied to the clergy. Nares.

    Instead of a faithful and painful teacher, they hire a Sir John,
    which hath better skill in playing at tables, or in keeping of a
    garden, than in God's word.


Latimer.

4. A respectful title, used in addressing a man, without being prefixed
to his name; -- used especially in speaking to elders or superiors;
sometimes, also, used in the way of emphatic formality. "What's that to
you, sir?" Sheridan.

Anciently, this title, was often used when a person was addressed as a
man holding a certain office, or following a certain business. "Sir man
of law." "Sir parish priest." Chaucer.

Sir reverance. See under Reverence, n.

Si*ras"kier (?), n. See Seraskier.

Si*ras"kier*ate (?), n. See Seraskierate.

Sir*bo"ni*an (?), a. See Serbonian.

Sir*car" (?), n. [Hind. & Per. sarkr a superintendant, overseer, chief;
Per. sar the head + kr action, work.] 1. A Hindoo clerk or accountant.
[India]

2. A district or province; a circar. [India]

3. The government; the supreme authority of the state. [India]

Sir*dar" (?), n. [Hind. & Per. sardr a chief, general; sar the head,
top + dr holding, possessing.] A native chief in Hindostan; a headman.
Malcom.

Sire (?), n. [F. sire, originally, an older person. See Sir.] 1. A
lord, master, or other person in authority. See Sir. [Obs.]

    Pain and distress, sickness and ire, And melancholy that angry
    sire, Be of her palace senators.


Rom. of R.

2. A tittle of respect formerly used in speaking to elders and
superiors, but now only in addressing a sovereign.

3. A father; the head of a family; the husband.

    Jankin thet was our sire [i.e., husband].


Chaucer.

    And raise his issue, like a loving sire.


Shak.

4. A creator; a maker; an author; an originator.

    [He] was the sire of an immortal strain.


Shelley.

5. The male parent of a beast; -- applied especially to horses; as, the
horse had a good sire.

Sire is often used in composition; as in grandsire, grandfather;
great-grandsire, great- grandfather.

Sire, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sired (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Siring.] To beget;
to procreate; -- used of beasts, and especially of stallions.

Si*re"don (?), n. [NL., from Gr. &?;&?;&?; a siren.] (Zoöl.) The larval
form of any salamander while it still has external gills; especially,
one of those which, like the axolotl (Amblystoma Mexicanum), sometimes
lay eggs while in this larval state, but which under more favorable
conditions lose their gills and become normal salamanders. See also
Axolotl.

Si"ren (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;: cf. F. sirène.] 1. (Class.
Myth.) One of three sea nymphs, -- or, according to some writers, of
two, -- said to frequent an island near the coast of Italy, and to sing
with such sweetness that they lured mariners to destruction.

    Next where the sirens dwell you plow the seas; Their song is death,
    and makes destruction please.


Pope.

2. An enticing, dangerous woman. Shak.

3. Something which is insidious or deceptive.

    Consumption is a siren.


W. Irving.

4. A mermaid. [Obs.] Shak.

5. (Zoöl.) Any long, slender amphibian of the genus Siren or family
Sirenidæ, destitute of hind legs and pelvis, and having permanent
external gills as well as lungs. They inhabit the swamps, lagoons, and
ditches of the Southern United States. The more common species (Siren
lacertina) is dull lead-gray in color, and becames two feet long.

6. [F. sirène, properly, a siren in sense 1.] (Acoustics) An instrument
for producing musical tones and for ascertaining the number of sound
waves or vibrations per second which produce a note of a given pitch.
The sounds are produced by a perforated rotating disk or disks. A form
with two disks operated by steam or highly compressed air is used
sounding an alarm to vessels in fog. [Written also sirene, and syren.]

Si"ren, a. Of or pertaining to a siren; bewitching, like a siren;
fascinating; alluring; as, a siren song.

Si*rene" (?), n. See Siren, 6.

Si*re"ni*a (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) An order of large aquatic
herbivorous mammals, including the manatee, dugong, rytina, and several
fossil genera.

The hind limbs are either rudimentary or wanting, and the front ones
are changed to paddles. They have horny plates on the front part of the
jaws, and usually flat-crowned molar teeth. The stomach is complex and
the intestine long, as in other herbivorous mammals. See Cetacea (b).

Si*re"ni*an (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of Sirenia.

Si*ren"ic*al (?), a. Like, or appropriate to, a siren; fascinating;
deceptive.

    Here's couple of sirenical rascals shall enchant ye.


Marton.

Si"ren*ize (?), v. i. To use the enticements of a siren; to act as a
siren; to fascinate.

||Si*ri"a*sis (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;, fr. &?;&?;&?; the Dog
||Star, properly, scorching.] (Med.) (a) A sunstroke. (b) The act of
||exposing to a sun bath. [Obs.] Cf. Insolation.

Sir"i*us (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;, properly, scorching.]
(Astron.) The Dog Star. See Dog Star.

Sir"keer (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of Asiatic cuckoos
of the genus Taccocua, as the Bengal sirkeer (T. sirkee).

Sir"loin` (?), n. [A corruption of surloin. Not so called because this
cut of beef was once jocosely knighted (dubbed Sir Loin) by an English
king, as according to a popular story.] A loin of beef, or a part of a
loin. [Written also surloin.]

Sir"name` (?), n. See Surname.

Si"roc (?), n. See Sirocco. [Poetic] Emerson.

Si*roc"co (?), n.; pl. Siroccos (?). [It. sirocco, scirocco, Ar.
shorug, fr. sharq the rising of the sun, the east, fr, sharaca to rise
as the sun. Cf. Saracen.] An oppressive, relaxing wind from the Libyan
deserts, chiefly experienced in Italy, Malta, and Sicily.

Sir"rah (?), n. [Probably from Icel. sra, fr. F. sire. See Sir.] A term
of address implying inferiority and used in anger, contempt, reproach,
or disrespectful familiarity, addressed to a man or boy, but sometimes
to a woman. In sililoquies often preceded by ah. Not used in the
plural. "Ah, sirrah mistress." Beau. & Fl.

    Go, sirrah, to my cell.


Shak.

Sirt (?), n. [See Syrt.] A quicksand. [Obs.]

{ Sir"up (?) Syr"up }, n. [F. sirop (cf. It. siroppo, Sp. jarabe,
jarope, LL. siruppus, syrupus), fr. Ar. sharb a drink, wine, coffee,
sirup. Cf. Sherbet.] 1. A thick and viscid liquid made from the juice
of fruits, herbs, etc., boiled with sugar.

2. A thick and viscid saccharine solution of superior quality (as
sugarhouse sirup or molasses, maple sirup); specifically, in pharmacy
and often in cookery, a saturated solution of sugar and water (simple
sirup), or such a solution flavored or medicated.

    Lucent sirups tinct with cinnamon.


Keats.

Mixing sirup. See the Note under Dextrose.

{ Sir"uped (?), Syr"uped }, a. Moistened, covered, or sweetened with
sirup, or sweet juice.

{ Sir"up*y (?), Syr"up*y }, a. Like sirup, or partaking of its
qualities. Mortimer.

||Sir`vente" (?), n. [F. sirvente, fr. Pr. sirventes, sirventesc,
||originally, the poem of, or concerning, a sirvent, fr. sirvent,
||properly, serving, n., one who serves (e. g., as a soldier), fr.
||servir to serve, L. servire.] A peculiar species of poetry, for the
||most part devoted to moral and religious topics, and commonly
||satirical, -- often used by the troubadours of the Middle Ages.

Sis (?), n. A colloquial abbreviation of Sister.

Sis (?), n. Six. See Sise. [Obs.] Chaucer.

{ Si*sal" grass` (?), Si*sal" hemp` (?),} The prepared fiber of the
Agave Americana, or American aloe, used for cordage; -- so called from
Sisal, a port in Yucatan. See Sisal hemp, under Hemp.

Sis"co*wet (?), n. [OF American Indian origin.] (Zoöl.) A large, fat
variety of the namaycush found in Lake Superior; -- called also
siskawet, siskiwit.

Sise (?), n. [From Assize.] An assize. [Obs.]

Sise (?), n. [See Sice.] Six; the highest number on a die; the cast of
six in throwing dice.

    In the new casting of a die, when ace is on the top, sise must
    needs be at the bottom.


Fuller.

Sis"el (?), n. [Cf. G. ziesel. Cf. Zizel.] (Zoöl.) The suslik.

Si"ser (?), n. Cider. See Sicer. [Obs.] Chaucer.

{ Sis"e*ra*ra (?), Sis"e*ra*ry (?), } n. A hard blow. [Prov. Eng.]
Halliwell.

Sis"kin (?), n. [Dan. sisgen; cf. Sw. siska, G. zeisig, D. sijsje; of
Slav. origin; cf. Pol. czy&?;.] (Zoöl.) (a) A small green and yellow
European finch (Spinus spinus, or Carduelis spinus); -- called also
aberdevine. (b) The American pinefinch (S. pinus); -- called also pine
siskin. See Pinefinch.

The name is applied also to several other related species found in Asia
and South America.

Siskin green, a delicate shade of yellowish green, as in the mineral
torbernite.

Sis"ki*wit (?), n. (Zoöl.) The siscowet.

Sis"mo*graph (?), n. See Seismograph.

Sis*mom"e*ter (?), n. See Seismometer.

Siss (?), v. i. [Of imitative origin; cf. D. sissen, G. zischen.] To
make a hissing sound; as, a flatiron hot enough to siss when touched
with a wet finger. [Colloq. U. S.; Local, Eng.]

Siss, n. A hissing noise. [Colloq. U. S.]

Sis*soo" (?), n. [Hind. ss&?;.] (Bot.) A leguminous tree (Dalbergia
Sissoo) of the northern parts of India; also, the dark brown compact
and durable timber obtained from it. It is used in shipbuilding and for
gun carriages, railway ties, etc.

Sist (?), v. t. [L. sistere to bring to a stand, to stop.] 1. (Scots
Law) To stay, as judicial proceedings; to delay or suspend; to stop.

2. To cause to take a place, as at the bar of a court; hence, to cite;
to summon; to bring into court. [Scot.]

    Some, however, have preposterously sisted nature as the first or
    generative principle.


Sir W. Hamilton.

<! p. 1347 !>

Sist (?), n. (Scots Law) A stay or suspension of proceedings; an order
for a stay of proceedings. Burril.

Sis"ter (?), n. [OE. sister, fr. Icel. systir; also suster, from AS.
sweostor, sweoster, swuster, akin to OFries. sweester, suster, LG.
süster, suster, D. zuster, OS. & OHG. swestar, G. schwester, Icel.
systir, Sw. syster, Dan. söster, Goth. swistar, Lith. ses&?;, Russ.
sestra, Pol. siostra, L. soror, Skr. svasr. &radic;298. Cf. Cousin.] 1.
A female who has the same parents with another person, or who has one
of them only. In the latter case, she is more definitely called a half
sister. The correlative of brother.

    I am the sister of one Claudio.


Shak.

2. A woman who is closely allied to, or assocciated with, another
person, as in the sdame faith, society, order, or community. James ii.
15.

3. One of the same kind, or of the same condition; -- generally used
adjectively; as, sister fruits. Pope.

Sister Block (Naut.), a tackle block having two sheaves, one above the
other. -- Sister hooks, a pair of hooks fitted together, the shank of
one forming a mousing for the other; -- called also match hook. --
Sister of charity, Sister of mercy. (R. C. Ch.) See under Charity, and
Mercy.

Sis"ter, v. t. To be sister to; to resemble closely. [Obs.] Shak.

Sis"ter*hood (?), n. [Sister + hood.] 1. The state or relation of being
a sister; the office or duty of a sister.

    She . . . abhorr'd Her proper blood, and left to do the part Of
    sisterhood, to do that of a wife.


Daniel.

2. A society of sisters; a society of women united in one faith or
order; sisters, collectively. "A sisterhood of holy nuns." Shak.

    The fair young flowers . . . a beauteous sisterhood.


Bryant.

Sis"ter*ing, a. Contiguous. [Obs.] Shak.

Sis"ter-in-law` (?), n.; pl. Sisters-in-law (&?;). The sister of one's
husband or wife; also, the wife of one's brother; sometimes, the wife
of one's husband's or wife's brother.

Sis"ter*ly, a. Like a sister; becoming a sister, affectionate; as,
sisterly kindness; sisterly remorse. Shak.

Sis"tine (?), a.[It. sistino.] Of or pertaining to Pope Sixtus.

Sistine chapel, a chapel in the Vatican at Rome, built by Pope Sixtus
IV., and decorated with frescoes by Michael Angelo and others.

Sis"tren (?), n. pl. Sisters. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||Sis"trum (?), [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;, from &?;&?;&?; to shake.]
||(Mus.) An instrument consisting of a thin metal frame, through which
||passed a number of metal rods, and furnished with a handle by which
||it was shaken and made to rattle. It was peculiarly Egyptian, and
||used especially in the worship of Isis. It is still used in Nubia.

Sis`y*phe"an (?), a. Relating to Sisyphus; incessantly recurring; as,
Sisyphean labors.

Sis"y*phus (?), n. [L. Sisyphus, Sisyphus, fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;.]
(Class. Myth.) A king of Corinth, son of Æolus, famed for his cunning.
He was killed by Theseus, and in the lower world was condemned by Pluto
to roll to the top of a hill a huge stone, which constantly rolled back
again, making his task incessant.

Sit (?), obs. 3d pers. sing. pres. of Sit, for sitteth.

Sit, v. i. [imp. Sat (?) (Sate (?), archaic); p. p. Sat (Sitten (?),
obs.); p. pr. & vb. n. Sitting.] [OE. sitten, AS. sittan; akin to OS.
sittian, OFries. sitta, D. zitten, G. sitzen, OHG. sizzen, Icel. sitja,
SW. sitta, Dan. sidde, Goth. sitan, Russ. sidiete, L. sedere, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;, Skr. sad. &radic;154. Cf. Assess,Assize, Cathedral, Chair,
Dissident, Excise, Insidious, Possess, Reside, Sanhedrim, Seance, Seat,
n., Sedate, 4th Sell, Siege, Session, Set, v. t., Sizar, Size,
Subsidy.] 1. To rest upon the haunches, or the lower extremity of the
trunk of the body; -- said of human beings, and sometimes of other
animals; as, to sit on a sofa, on a chair, or on the ground.

    And he came and took the book put of the right hand of him that
    sate upon the seat.


Bible (1551) (Rev. v. 7.)

    I pray you, jest, sir, as you sit at dinner.


Shak.

2. To perch; to rest with the feet drawn up, as birds do on a branch,
pole, etc.

3. To remain in a state of repose; to rest; to abide; to rest in any
position or condition.

    And Moses said to . . . the children of Reuben, Shall your brothren
    go to war, and shall ye sit here?


Num. xxxii. 6.

    Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.


Shak.

4. To lie, rest, or bear; to press or weigh; - - with on; as, a weight
or burden sits lightly upon him.

    The calamity sits heavy on us.


Jer. Taylor.

5. To be adjusted; to fit; as, a coat sts well or ill.

    This new and gorgeous garment, majesty, Sits not so easy on me as
    you think.


Shak.

6. To suit one well or ill, as an act; to become; to befit; -- used
impersonally. [Obs.] Chaucer.

7. To cover and warm eggs for hatching, as a fowl; to brood; to
incubate.

    As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not.


Jer. xvii. 11.

8. To have position, as at the point blown from; to hold a relative
position; to have direction.

    Like a good miller that knows how to grind, which way soever the
    wind sits.


Selden.

    Sits the wind in that quarter?


Sir W. Scott.

9. To occupy a place or seat as a member of an official body; as, to
sit in Congress.

10. To hold a session; to be in session for official business; -- said
of legislative assemblies, courts, etc.; as, the court sits in January;
the aldermen sit to- night.

11. To take a position for the purpose of having some artistic
representation of one's self made, as a picture or a bust; as, to sit
to a painter.

To sit at, to rest under; to be subject to. [Obs.] "A farmer can not
husband his ground so well if he sit at a great rent". Bacon. -- To sit
at meat or at table, to be at table for eating. -- To sit down. (a) To
place one's self on a chair or other seat; as, to sit down when tired.
(b) To begin a siege; as, the enemy sat down before the town. (c) To
settle; to fix a permanent abode. Spenser. (d) To rest; to cease as
satisfied. "Here we can not sit down, but still proceed in our search."
Rogers. -- To sit for a fellowship, to offer one's self for examination
with a view to obtaining a fellowship. [Eng. Univ.] -- To sit out. (a)
To be without engagement or employment. [Obs.] Bp. Sanderson. (b) To
outstay. -- To sit under, to be under the instruction or ministrations
of; as, to sit under a preacher; to sit under good preaching. -- To sit
up, to rise from, or refrain from, a recumbent posture or from sleep;
to sit with the body upright; as, to sit up late at night; also, to
watch; as, to sit up with a sick person. "He that was dead sat up, and
began to speak." Luke vii. 15.

Sit (?), v. t. 1. To sit upon; to keep one's seat upon; as, he sits a
horse well.

    Hardly the muse can sit the headstrong horse.


Prior.

2. To cause to be seated or in a sitting posture; to furnish a seat to;
-- used reflexively.

    They sat them down to weep.


Milton.

    Sit you down, father; rest you.


Shak.

3. To suit (well or ill); to become. [Obs. or R.]

Site (?), n. [L. situs, fr. sinere, situm, to let, p. p. situs placed,
lying, situate: cf. F. site. Cf. Position.] 1. The place where anything
is fixed; situation; local position; as, the site of a city or of a
house. Chaucer.

2. A place fitted or chosen for any certain permanent use or
occupation; as, a site for a church.

3. The posture or position of a thing. [R.]

    The semblance of a lover fixed In melancholy site.


Thomson.

Sit"ed (?), a. Having a site; situated. [Obs.]

    [The garden] sited was in fruitful soil.


Chaucer.

Sit"fast` (?), a. [Sit + fast.] Fixed; stationary; immovable. [R.]

    'T is good, when you have crossed the sea and back, To find the
    sitfast acres where you left them.


Emerson.

Sit"fast`, n. (Far.) A callosity with inflamed edges, on the back of a
horse, under the saddle.

Sith (?), prep., adv., & conj. [See Since.] Since; afterwards; seeing
that. [Obs.]

    We need not fear them, sith Christ is with us.


Latimer.

    Sith thou art rightful judge.


Chaucer.

{ Sith (?), Sithe (?), } n. [AS. &?;&?;&?; a path, way, time,
occasion.] Time. [Obs.] Chaucer.

    And humbly thanked him a thousand sithes.


Spenser.

Sithe (?), v. i. [Cf. Sigh.] To sigh. [A spelling of a corrupt and
provincial pronunciation.]

Sithe (?), n. A scythe. [Obs.] Milton.

Sithe, v. t. To cut with a scythe; to scythe. [Obs.]

Sithed (?), a. Scythed. [Obs.] T. Warton.

Sithe"man (?), n. A mower. [Obs.] Marston.

Sith"en (?), adv. & conj. [See Since.] Since; afterwards. See 1st Sith.
[Obs.]

    Fortune was first friend and sithen foe.


Chaucer.

{ Sith"ence, Sith"ens } (?), adv. & conj. Since. See Sith, and Sithen.
[Obs.] Piers Plowman.

Sith"then (?), adv. & conj. See Sithen. [Obs.]

    Siththen that the world began.


Chaucer.

Si*tol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; food + -logy.] A treatise on the
regulation of the diet; dietetics. [Written also sitiology.]

Si`to*pho"bi*a (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; food + &?;&?;&?;&?;
fear.] (Med.) A version to food; refusal to take nourishment. [Written
also sitiophobia.]

Sit"ten (?), obs. p. p. of Sit, for sat.

Sit"ter (?), n. 1. One who sits; esp., one who sits for a portrait or a
bust.

2. A bird that sits or incubates.

Sit"tine (?), a. [NL. sitta the nuthatch, from Gr. &?;&?;&?;.] (Zoöl.)
Of or pertaining to the family Sittidæ, or nuthatches.

Sit"ting (?), a. Being in the state, or the position, of one who, or
that which, sits.

Sit"ting, n. 1. The state or act of one who sits; the posture of one
who occupies a seat.

2. A seat, or the space occupied by or allotted for a person, in a
church, theater, etc.; as, the hall has 800 sittings.

3. The act or time of sitting, as to a portrait painter, photographer,
etc.

4. The actual presence or meeting of any body of men in their seats,
clothed with authority to transact business; a session; as, a sitting
of the judges of the King's Bench, or of a commission.

    The sitting closed in great agitation.


Macaulay.

5. The time during which one sits while doing something, as reading a
book, playing a game, etc.

    For the understanding of any one of St. Paul's Epistles I read it
    all through at one sitting.


Locke.

6. A brooding over eggs for hatching, as by fowls.

    The male bird . . . amuses her [the female] with his songs during
    the whole time of her sitting.


Addison.

Sitting room, an apartment where the members of a family usually sit,
as distinguished from a drawing-room, parlor, chamber, or kitchen.

{ Sit"u*ate (?; 135), Sit"u*a`ted (?) }, a. [LL. situatus, from situare
to place, fr. L. situs situation, site. See Site.] 1. Having a site,
situation, or location; being in a relative position; permanently
fixed; placed; located; as, a town situated, or situate, on a hill or
on the seashore.

2. Placed; residing.

    Pleasure situate in hill and dale.


Milton.

Situate is now less used than situated, but both are well authorized.

Sit"u*ate (?), v. t. To place. [R.] Landor.

Sit`u*a"tion (?), n. [LL. situatio: cf. F. situation.] 1. Manner in
which an object is placed; location, esp. as related to something else;
position; locality site; as, a house in a pleasant situation.

2. Position, as regards the conditions and circumstances of the case.

    A situation of the greatest ease and tranquillity.


Rogers.

3. Relative position; circumstances; temporary state or relation at a
moment of action which excites interest, as of persons in a dramatic
scene.

    There's situation for you! there's an heroic group!


Sheridan.

4. Permanent position or employment; place; office; as, a situation in
a store; a situation under government.

Syn. -- State; position; seat; site; station; post; place; office;
condition; case; plight. See State.

||Si"tus (?), n. [L., situation.] (Bot.) The method in which the parts
||of a plant are arranged; also, the position of the parts. Henslow.

Sitz" bath` (?). [G. sitzbad.] A tub in which one bathes in a sitting
posture; also, a bath so taken; a hip bath.

||Si"va (?), n. [Skr. Civa, properly, kind, gracious.] (Hindoo Myth.)
||One of the triad of Hindoo gods. He is the avenger or destroyer, and
||in modern worship symbolizes the reproductive power of nature.

||Si"van (?), n. [Heb. svn.] The third month of the Jewish
||ecclesiastical year; -- supposed to correspond nearly with our month
||of June.

||Siv`a*the"ri*um (?), n. [NL., from E. Siva + Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a
||beast, an animal.] (Paleon.) A genus of very large extinct ruminants
||found in the Tertiary formation of India. The snout was prolonged in
||the form of a proboscis. The male had four horns, the posterior pair
||being large and branched. It was allied to the antelopes, but very
||much larger than any exsisting species.

Siv"er (?), v. i. To simmer. [Obs.] Holland.

Siv"vens (&?;), n. (Med.) See Sibbens.

Si"win (?), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sewen.

Six (?), a. [AS. six, seox, siex; akin to OFries. sex, D. zes, OS. &
OHG. sehs, G. sechs, Icel., Sw., & Dan. sex, Goth. saíhs, Lith. szeszi,
Russ. sheste, Gael. & Ir. se, W. chwech, L. sex, Gr. &?;&?;, Per.
shesh, Skr. shash. &radic;304. Cf. Hexagon, Hexameter, Samite, Senary,
Sextant, Sice.] One more than five; twice three; as, six yards.

Six Nations (Ethnol.), a confederation of North American Indians formed
by the union of the Tuscaroras and the Five Nations. -- Six points
circle. (Geom.) See Nine points circle, under Nine.

Six, n. 1. The number greater by a unit than five; the sum of three and
three; six units or objects.

2. A symbol representing six units, as 6, vi., or VI.

To be at six and seven or at sixes and sevens, to be in disorder.
Bacon. Shak. Swift.

Six"fold` (?), a. [AS. sixfealand.] Six times repeated; six times as
much or as many.

Six"-foot`er (?), n. One who is six feet tall. [Colloq. U.S.]

Six"pence (?), n.; pl. Sixpences (&?;). An English silver coin of the
value of six pennies; half a shilling, or about twelve cents.

Six"pen`ny (?), a. Of the value of, or costing, sixpence; as, a
sixpenny loaf.

Six"score` (?), a. & n. [Six + score, n.] Six times twenty; one hundred
and twenty.

Six"-shoot`er (?), n. A pistol or other firearm which can be fired six
times without reloading especially, a six-chambered revolver. [Colloq.
U.S.]

Six"teen` (?), a. [AS. sixt&?;ne, sixt&?;ne. See Six, and Ten, and cf.
Sixty.] Six and ten; consisting of six and ten; fifteen and one more.

Six"teen`, n. 1. The number greater by a unit than fifteen; the sum of
ten and six; sixteen units or objects.

2. A symbol representing sixteen units, as 16, or xvi.

Six*teen"mo (?), n.; pl. Sixteenmos (&?;). See Sextodecimo.

Six"teenth` (?), a. [From Sixteen: cf. AS. sixteó&?;a.] 1. Sixth after
the tenth; next in order after the fifteenth.

2. Constituting or being one of sixteen equal parts into which anything
is divided.

Sixteenth note (Mus.), the sixteenth part of a whole note; a
semiquaver.

Six"teenth`, n. 1. The quotient of a unit divided by sixteen; one of
sixteen equal parts of one whole.

2. The next in order after the fifteenth; the sixth after the tenth.

3. (Mus.) An interval comprising two octaves and a second. Moore
(Encyc. of Music.)

Sixth (?), a. [From Six: cf. AS. sixta, siexta.] 1. First after the
fifth; next in order after the fifth.

2. Constituting or being one of six equal parts into which anything is
divided.

<! p. 1348 !>

Sixth (?), n. 1. The quotient of a unit divided by six; one of six
equal parts which form a whole.

2. The next in order after the fifth.

3. (Mus.) The interval embracing six diatonic degrees of the scale.

Sixth"ly, adv. In the sixth place. Bacon.

Six"ti*eth (?), a. [As. sixtiogoða, sixtigoða.] 1. Next in order after
the fifty-ninth.

2. Constituting or being one one of sixty equal parts into which
anything is divided.

Six"ti*eth, n. 1. The quotient of a unit divided by sixty; one of sixty
equal parts forming a whole.

2. The next in order after the fifty-ninth; the tenth after the
fiftieth.

Six"ty (?), a. [AS. siextig; akin to G. sechzig, Goth. saíhs tigjus.
See Six, Ten, and cf. Sixteen.] Six times ten; fifty-nine and one more;
threescore.

Six"ty, n.; pl. Sixties (&?;). 1. The sum of six times ten; sixty units
or objects.

2. A symbol representing sixty units, as 60, lx., or LX.

Six`ty-fourth" (?), a. Constituting or being one of sixty-four equal
parts into which a thing is divided.

Sixty-fourth note (Mus.), the sixty- fourth part of a whole note; a
hemi-demi-semiquaver.

Siz"a*ble (?), a. 1. Of considerable size or bulk. "A sizable volume."
Bp. Hurd.

2. Being of reasonable or suitable size; as, sizable timber; sizable
bulk. Arbuthnot.

Si"zar (?), n. One of a body of students in the universities of
Cambridge (Eng.) and Dublin, who, having passed a certain examination,
are exempted from paying college fees and charges. A sizar corresponded
to a servitor at Oxford.

    The sizar paid nothing for food and tuition, and very little for
    lodging.


Macaulay.

They formerly waited on the table at meals; but this is done away with.
They were probably so called from being thus employed in distributing
the size, or provisions. See 4th Size, 2.

Si"zar*ship, n. The position or standing of a sizar.

Size (?), n. [See Sice, and Sise.] Six.

Size (?), n. [OIt. sisa glue used by painters, shortened fr. assisa,
fr. assidere, p. p. assiso, to make to sit, to seat, to place, L.
assidere to sit down; ad + sidere to sit down, akin to sedere to sit.
See Sit, v. i., and cf. Assize, Size bulk.] 1. A thin, weak glue used
in various trades, as in painting, bookbinding, paper making, etc.

2. Any viscous substance, as gilder's varnish.

Size, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sized (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sizing.] To cover
with size; to prepare with size.

Size, n. [Abbrev. from assize. See Assize, and cf. Size glue.] 1. A
settled quantity or allowance. See Assize. [Obs.] "To scant my sizes."
Shak.

2. (Univ. of Cambridge, Eng.) An allowance of food and drink from the
buttery, aside from the regular dinner at commons; -- corresponding to
battel at Oxford.

3. Extent of superficies or volume; bulk; bigness; magnitude; as, the
size of a tree or of a mast; the size of a ship or of a rock.

4. Figurative bulk; condition as to rank, ability, character, etc.; as,
the office demands a man of larger size.

    Men of a less size and quality.


L'Estrange.

    The middling or lower size of people.


Swift.

5. A conventional relative measure of dimension, as for shoes, gloves,
and other articles made up for sale.

6. An instrument consisting of a number of perforated gauges fastened
together at one end by a rivet, -- used for ascertaining the size of
pearls. Knight.

Size roll, a small piese of parchment added to a roll. -- Size stick, a
measuring stick used by shoemakers for ascertaining the size of the
foot.

Syn. -- Dimension; bigness; largeness; greatness; magnitude.

Size, v. t. 1. To fix the standard of. "To size weights and measures."
[R.] Bacon.

2. To adjust or arrange according to size or bulk. Specifically: (a)
(Mil.) To take the height of men, in order to place them in the ranks
according to their stature. (b) (Mining) To sift, as pieces of ore or
metal, in order to separate the finer from the coarser parts.

3. To swell; to increase the bulk of. Beau. & Fl.

4. (Mech.) To bring or adjust anything exactly to a required dimension,
as by cutting.

To size up, to estimate or ascertain the character and ability of. See
4th Size, 4. [Slang, U.S.]

    We had to size up our fellow legislators.


The Century.

Size, v. i. 1. To take greater size; to increase in size.

    Our desires give them fashion, and so, As they wax lesser, fall, as
    they size, grow.


Donne.

2. (Univ. of Cambridge, Eng.) To order food or drink from the buttery;
hence, to enter a score, as upon the buttery book.

Sized (?), a. 1. Adjusted according to size.

2. Having a particular size or magnitude; -- chiefly used in compounds;
as, large-sized; common- sized.

Si"zel (?), n. Same as Scissel, 2.

Siz"er (?), n. 1. See Sizar.

2. (Mech.) (a) An instrument or contrivance to size articles, or to
determine their size by a standard, or to separate and distribute them
according to size. (b) An instrument or tool for bringing anything to
an exact size.

Siz"i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sizy; viscousness.

Siz"ing, n. 1. Act of covering or treating with size.

2. A weak glue used in various trades; size.

Siz"ing, n. 1. The act of sorting with respect to size.

2. The act of bringing anything to a certain size.

3. (Univ. of Cambridge, Eng.) Food and drink ordered from the buttery
by a student.

Siz"y (?), a. [From 2d Size.] Sizelike; viscous; glutinous; as, sizy
blood. Arbuthnot.

Siz"zle (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sizzled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sizzling
(?).] [See Siss.] To make a hissing sound; to fry, or to dry and
shrivel up, with a hissing sound. [Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U. S.] Forby.

Siz"zle, n. A hissing sound, as of something frying over a fire. [Prov.
Eng. & Colloq. U. S.]

Siz"zling (?), a. & n. from Sizzle.

Skad"dle (?), n. [Dim. of scath.] Hurt; damage. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]
Ray.

Skad"dle, a. Hurtful. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.] Ray.

Skad"don (?), n. (Zoöl.) The larva of a bee. [Prov. Eng.]

Skag (?), n. (Naut.) An additional piece fastened to the keel of a boat
to prevent lateral motion. See Skeg.

Skain (?), n. See Skein. [Obs.]

Skain, n. See Skean. Drayton.

Skains"mate` (?), n. [Perhaps originally, a companion in winding thread
(see Skein), or a companion in arms, from skain a sword (see Skean).] A
messmate; a companion. [Obs.]

    Scurvy knave! I am none of his firt-gills; I am none of his
    skainsmates.


Shak.

Skaith (?), n. See Scatch. [Scot.]

Skald (?), n. See 5th Scald.

Skald"ic (?), a. See Scaldic. Max Müller.

Skall (?), v. t. To scale; to mount. [Obs.]

{ Skar (?), Skare (?), } a. [From the root of scare.] Wild; timid; shy.
[Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Skart (?), n. [Cf. Scarf a cormorant.] (Zoöl.) The shag. [Prov. Eng.]

Skate (?), n. [D. schaats. Cf. Scatches.] A metallic runner with a
frame shaped to fit the sole of a shoe, -- made to be fastened under
the foot, and used for moving rapidly on ice.

    Batavia rushes forth; and as they sweep, On sounding skates, a
    thousand different ways, In circling poise, swift as the winds,
    along, The then gay land is maddened all to joy.


Thomson.

Roller skate. See under Roller.

Skate, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Skated; p. pr. & vb. n. Skating.] To move on
skates.

Skate, n. [Icel. skata; cf. Prov. G. schatten, meer-schatten, L.
squatus, squatina, and E. shad.] (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of
large, flat elasmobranch fishes of the genus Raia, having a long,
slender tail, terminated by a small caudal fin. The pectoral fins,
which are large and broad and united to the sides of the body and head,
give a somewhat rhombic form to these fishes. The skin is more or less
spinose.

Some of the species are used for food, as the European blue or gray
skate (Raia batis), which sometimes weighs nearly 200 pounds. The
American smooth, or barn-door, skate (R. lævis) is also a large
species, often becoming three or four feet across. The common spiny
skate (R. erinacea) is much smaller.

Skate's egg. See Sea purse. -- Skate sucker, any marine leech of the
genus Pontobdella, parasitic on skates.

Skat"er (?), n. 1. One who skates.

2. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of hemipterous insects belonging
to Gerris, Pyrrhocoris, Prostemma, and allied genera. They have long
legs, and run rapidly over the surface of the water, as if skating.

Ska"tol (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;, dung + -ol.] (Physiol. Chem.) A
constituent of human fæces formed in the small intestines as a product
of the putrefaction of albuminous matter. It is also found in reduced
indigo. Chemically it is methyl indol, C9H9N.

Skayles (?), n. [&radic;159.] Skittles. [Obs.]

Skean (?), n. [Ir sgian; akin to Gael. sgian, W. ysgien a large knife,
a scimiter.] A knife or short dagger, esp. that in use among the
Highlanders of Scotland. [Variously spelt.] "His skean, or pistol."
Spenser.

Ske*dad"dle (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Skedaddled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Skedaddling (?).] [Of uncertain etymology.] To betake one's self to
flight, as if in a panic; to flee; to run away. [Slang, U. S.]

Skee (?), n. [Dan. ski; Icel. sk&?; a billet of wood. See Skid.] A long
strip of wood, curved upwards in front, used on the foot for sliding.

Skeed (?), n. See Skid.

Skeel (?), n. [Icel. skj&?;la a pail, bucket.] A shallow wooden vessel
for holding milk or cream. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.] Grose.

{ Skeel"duck` (?), Skeel"goose` (?), } n. [See Sheldrake.] (Zoöl.) The
common European sheldrake. [Prov. Eng.]

Skeet (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] (Naut.) A scoop with a long handle,
used to wash the sides of a vessel, and formerly to wet the sails or
deck.

Skeg (?), n. [Prov. E., also a stump of a branch, a wooden peg; cf.
Icel. sk&?;gr a wood, Sw. skog. Cf. Shaw.] 1. A sort of wild plum.
[Obs.] Holland.

2. pl. A kind of oats. Farm. Encyc.

3. (Naut.) The after part of the keel of a vessel, to which the rudder
is attached.

Skeg"ger (?), n. (Zoöl.) The parr. Walton.

Skein (?), n. [OE. skeyne, OF. escaigne, F. écagne, probably of Celtic
origin; cf. Ir. sgainne, Gael. sgeinnidh thread, small twine; or
perhaps the English word is immediately from Celtic.] 1. A quantity of
yarn, thread, or the like, put up together, after it is taken from the
reel, -- usually tied in a sort of knot.

A skein of cotton yarn is formed by eighty turns of the thread round a
fifty-four inch reel.

2. (Wagon Making) A metallic strengthening band or thimble on the
wooden arm of an axle. Knight.

Skein, n. (Zoöl.) A flight of wild fowl (wild geese or the like).
[Prov. Eng.]

Skeine (?), n. See Skean.

Skel"der (?), v. t. & i. [Etymol. uncertain.] To deceive; to cheat; to
trick. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Skel"der, n. A vagrant; a cheat. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

{ Skel"drake` (?), or Skiel"drake` (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) (a) The common
European sheldrake. (b) The oyster catcher.

Skel"et (?), n. A skeleton. See Scelet.

Skel"e*tal (?), a. Pertaining to the skeleton.

Skel`e*tog"e*nous (?), a. [Skeleton + -genous.] Forming or producing
parts of the skeleton.

Skel`e*tol"o*gy (?), n. [Skeleton + -logy.] That part of anatomy which
treats of the skeleton; also, a treatise on the skeleton.

Skel"e*ton (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; (sc. &?;&?;&?;) a dried
body, a mummy, fr. &?;&?;&?;&?; dried up, parched, &?;&?;&?;&?; to dry,
dry up, parch.] 1. (Anat.) (a) The bony and cartilaginous framework
which supports the soft parts of a vertebrate animal. [See Illust. of
the Human Skeleton, in Appendix.] (b) The more or less firm or hardened
framework of an invertebrate animal.

In a wider sense, the skeleton includes the whole connective-tissue
framework with the integument and its appendages. See Endoskeleton, and
Exoskeleton.

2. Hence, figuratively: (a) A very thin or lean person. (b) The
framework of anything; the principal parts that support the rest, but
without the appendages.

    The great skeleton of the world.


Sir M. Hale.

(c) The heads and outline of a literary production, especially of a
sermon.

Skel"e*ton, a. Consisting of, or resembling, a skeleton; consisting
merely of the framework or outlines; having only certain leading
features of anything; as, a skeleton sermon; a skeleton crystal.

Skeleton bill, a bill or draft made out in blank as to the amount or
payee, but signed by the acceptor. [Eng.] -- Skeleton key, a key with
nearly the whole substance of the web filed away, to adapt it to avoid
the wards of a lock; a master key; -- used for opening locks to which
it has not been especially fitted. -- Skeleton leaf, a leaf from which
the pulpy part has been removed by chemical means, the fibrous part
alone remaining. -- Skeleton proof, a proof of a print or engraving,
with the inscription outlined in hair strokes only, such proofs being
taken before the engraving is finished. -- Skeleton regiment, a
regiment which has its complement of officers, but in which there are
few enlisted men. -- Skeleton shrimp (Zoöl.), a small crustacean of the
genus Caprella. See Illust. under Læmodipoda.

Skel"e*ton*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skeletonized (?); p. pr. & vb.
n. Skeletonizing (?).] To prepare a skeleton of; also, to reduce, as a
leaf, to its skeleton. Pop. Sci. Monthly.

Skel"e*ton*i`zer (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any small moth whose larva eats the
parenchyma of leaves, leaving the skeleton; as, the apple-leaf
skeletonizer.

Skel"lum (?), n. [Dan. schelm, fr. G. schelm.] A scoundrel. [Obs. or
Scot.] Pepys. Burns.

Skel"ly (?), v. i. [Cf. Dan. skele, Sw. skela.] To squint. [Prov. Eng.
& Scot.] Sir W. Scott.

Skel"ly, n. A squint. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Skelp (?), n. [Cf. Prov. E. skelp to kick severely, to move rapidly;
Gael. sgealp, n., a slap with the palm of the hand, v., to strike with
the palm of the hand.] 1. A blow; a smart stroke. [Prov. Eng.]
Brockett.

2. A squall; also, a heavy fall of rain. [Scot.]

Skelp, v. t. To strike; to slap. [Scot.] C. Reade.

Skelp, n. A wrought-iron plate from which a gun barrel or pipe is made
by bending and welding the edges together, and drawing the thick tube
thus formed.

Skel"ter (?), v. i. [Cf. Helter- skelter.] To run off helter-skelter;
to hurry; to scurry; -- with away or off. [Colloq.] A. R. Wallace.

Sken (?), v. i. To squint. [Prov. Eng.]

Skene (?), n. See Skean. C. Kingsley.

Skep (?), n. [Icel. skeppa a measure, bushel; cf. Gael. sgeap a basket,
a beehive.] 1. A coarse round farm basket. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. & Scot.]
Tusser.

2. A beehive. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Skep"tic (?), n. [Gr. skeptiko`s thoughtful, reflective, fr.
ske`ptesqai to look carefully or about, to view, consider: cf. L.
scepticus, F. sceptique. See Scope.] [Written also sceptic.] 1. One who
is yet undecided as to what is true; one who is looking or inquiring
for what is true; an inquirer after facts or reasons.

<! p. 1349 !>

2. (Metaph.) A doubter as to whether any fact or truth can be certainly
known; a universal doubter; a Pyrrhonist; hence, in modern usage,
occasionally, a person who questions whether any truth or fact can be
established on philosophical grounds; sometimes, a critical inquirer,
in opposition to a dogmatist.

    All this criticism [of Hume] proceeds upon the erroneous hypothesis
    that he was a dogmatist. He was a skeptic; that is, he accepted the
    principles asserted by the prevailing dogmatism: and only showed
    that such and such conclusions were, on these principles,
    inevitable.


Sir W. Hamilton.

3. (Theol.) A person who doubts the existence and perfections of God,
or the truth of revelation; one who disbelieves the divine origin of
the Christian religion.

    Suffer not your faith to be shaken by the sophistries of skeptics.


S. Clarke.

This word and its derivatives are often written with c instead of k in
the first syllable, -- sceptic, sceptical, scepticism, etc. Dr.
Johnson, struck with the extraordinary irregularity of giving c its
hard sound before e, altered the spelling, and his example has been
followed by most of the lexicographers who have succeeded him; yet the
prevalent practice among English writers and printers is in favor of
the other mode. In the United States this practice is reversed, a large
and increasing majority of educated persons preferring the orthography
which is most in accordance with etymology and analogy.

Syn. -- Infidel; unbeliever; doubter. -- See Infidel.

{ Skep"tic (?), Skep"tic*al (?), } a. [Written also sceptic,
sceptical.] 1. Of or pertaining to a sceptic or skepticism;
characterized by skepticism; hesitating to admit the certainly of
doctrines or principles; doubting of everything.

2. (Theol.) Doubting or denying the truth of revelation, or the sacred
Scriptures.

    The skeptical system subverts the whole foundation of morals.


R. Hall.

-- Skep"tac*al*ly, adv. -- Skep"tic*al*ness, n.

Skep"ti*cism (?), n. [Cf. F. scepticisme.] [Written also scepticism.]
1. An undecided, inquiring state of mind; doubt; uncertainty.

    That momentary amazement, and irresolution, and confusion, which is
    the result of skepticism.


Hune.

2. (Metaph.) The doctrine that no fact or principle can be certainly
known; the tenet that all knowledge is uncertain; Pyrrohonism;
universal doubt; the position that no fact or truth, however worthy of
confidence, can be established on philosophical grounds; critical
investigation or inquiry, as opposed to the positive assumption or
assertion of certain principles.

3. (Theol.) A doubting of the truth of revelation, or a denial of the
divine origin of the Christian religion, or of the being, perfections,
or truth of God.

    Let no . . . secret skepticism lead any one to doubt whether this
    blessed prospect will be realized.


S. Miller.

Skep"ti*cize (?), v. i. To doubt; to pretend to doubt of everything.
[R.]

    To skepticize, where no one else will . . . hesitate.


Shaftesbury.

Sker"ry (?), n.; pl. Skerries (#). [Of Scand. origin; cf. Icel. sker,
Sw. skär, Dan. ski&?;r. Cf. Scar a bank.] A rocky isle; an insulated
rock. [Scot.]

Sketch (?), n. [D. schets, fr. It. schizzo a sketch, a splash (whence
also F. esquisse; cf. Esquisse.); cf. It. schizzare to splash, to
sketch.] An outline or general delineation of anything; a first rough
or incomplete draught or plan of any design; especially, in the fine
arts, such a representation of an object or scene as serves the
artist's purpose by recording its chief features; also, a preliminary
study for an original work.

Syn. -- Outline; delineation; draught; plan; design. -- Sketch,
Outline, Delineation. An outline gives only the bounding lines of some
scene or picture. A sketch fills up the outline in part, giving broad
touches, by which an imperfect idea may be conveyed. A delineation goes
further, carrying out the more striking features of the picture, and
going so much into detail as to furnish a clear conception of the
whole. Figuratively, we may speak of the outlines of a plan, of a work,
of a project, etc., which serve as a basis on which the subordinate
parts are formed, or of sketches of countries, characters, manners,
etc., which give us a general idea of the things described. Crabb.

Sketch, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sketched (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sketching.]
[Cf D. schetsen, It. schizzare. See Sketch, n.] 1. To draw the outline
or chief features of; to make a rought of.

2. To plan or describe by giving the principal points or ideas of.

Syn. -- To delineate; design; draught; depict.

Sketch, v. i. To make sketches, as of landscapes.

Sketch"book`, n. A book of sketches or for sketches.

Sketch"er (?), n. One who sketches.

Sketch"i*ly (?), adv. In a sketchy or incomplete manner. "Sketchily
descriptive." Bartlett.

Sketch"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being sketchy; lack of
finish; incompleteness.

Sketch"y (?), a. Containing only an outline or rough form; being in the
manner of a sketch; incomplete.

    The execution is sketchy throughout; the head, in particular, is
    left in the rough.


J. S. Harford.

Skew (?), adv. [Cf. D. scheef. Dan. ski&?;v, Sw. skef, Icel. skeifr, G.
schief, also E. shy, a. & v. i.] Awry; obliquely; askew.

Skew, a. Turned or twisted to one side; situated obliquely; skewed; --
chiefly used in technical phrases.

Skew arch, an oblique arch. See under Oblique. -- Skew back. (Civil
Engin.) (a) The course of masonry, the stone, or the iron plate, having
an inclined face, which forms the abutment for the voussoirs of a
segmental arch. (b) A plate, cap, or shoe, having an inclined face to
receive the nut of a diagonal brace, rod, or the end of an inclined
strut, in a truss or frame. -- Skew bridge. See under Bridge, n. --
Skew curve (Geom.), a curve of double curvature, or a twisted curve.
See Plane curve, under Curve. -- Skew gearing, or Skew bevel gearing
(Mach.), toothed gearing, generally resembling bevel gearing, for
connecting two shafts that are neither parallel nor intersecting, and
in which the teeth slant across the faces of the gears. -- Skew surface
(Geom.), a ruled surface such that in general two successive generating
straight lines do not intersect; a warped surface; as, the helicoid is
a skew surface. -- Skew symmetrical determinant (Alg.), a determinant
in which the elements in each column of the matrix are equal to the
elements of the corresponding row of the matrix with the signs changed,
as in (1), below.

(1) 0 2 -3-2 0 53 -5 0 (2) 4 -1 71 8 - 2-7 2 1

This requires that the numbers in the diagonal from the upper left to
lower right corner be zeros. A like determinant in which the numbers in
the diagonal are not zeros is a skew determinant, as in (2), above.

Skew (?), n. (Arch.) A stone at the foot of the slope of a gable, the
offset of a buttress, or the like, cut with a sloping surface and with
a check to receive the coping stones and retain them in place.

Skew, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Skewed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skewing.] 1. To
walk obliquely; to go sidling; to lie or move obliquely.

    Child, you must walk straight, without skewing.


L'Estrange.

2. To start aside; to shy, as a horse. [Prov. Eng.]

3. To look obliquely; to squint; hence, to look slightingly or
suspiciously. Beau. & Fl.

Skew, v. t. [See Skew, adv.] 1. To shape or form in an oblique way; to
cause to take an oblique position.

2. To throw or hurl obliquely.

Skew"bald` (?), a. Marked with spots and patches of white and some
color other than black; -- usually distinguished from piebald, in which
the colors are properly white and black. Said of horses.

Skew"er (?), n. [Probably of Scand, origin; cf. Sw. & Dan. skifer a
slate. Cf. Shuver a fragment.] A pin of wood or metal for fastening
meat to a spit, or for keeping it in form while roasting.

    Meat well stuck with skewers to make it look round.


Swift.

Skew"er, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skewered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skewering.]
To fasten with skewers.

Skid (skd), n. [Icel. skð a billet of wood. See Shide.] [Written also
skeed.] 1. A shoe or clog, as of iron, attached to a chain, and placed
under the wheel of a wagon to prevent its turning when descending a
steep hill; a drag; a skidpan; also, by extension, a hook attached to a
chain, and used for the same purpose.

2. A piece of timber used as a support, or to receive pressure.
Specifically: (a) pl. (Naut.) Large fenders hung over a vessel's side
to protect it in handling a cargo. Totten. (b) One of a pair of timbers
or bars, usually arranged so as to form an inclined plane, as form a
wagon to a door, along which anything is moved by sliding or rolling.
(c) One of a pair of horizontal rails or timbers for supporting
anything, as a boat, a barrel, etc.

Skid, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skidded (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skidding.] 1. To
protect or support with a skid or skids; also, to cause to move on
skids.

2. To check with a skid, as wagon wheels. Dickens.

Skid"daw` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The black guillemot. [Prov. Eng.]

Skid"pan` (?), n. See Skid, n., 1. [Eng.]

Skied (?), imp. & p. p. of Sky, v. t.

Ski"ey (?), a. See Skyey. Shelley.

Skiff (?), n. [F. esquif, fr. OHG. skif, G. schiff. See Ship.] A small,
light boat.

    The pilot of some small night-foundered skiff.


Milton.

Skiff caterpillar (Zoöl.), the larva of a moth (Limacodes scapha); --
so called from its peculiar shape.

Skiff, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skiffed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skiffing.] To
navigate in a skiff. [R.]

Skif"fling (?), n. (Quarrying) Rough dressing by knocking off knobs or
projections; knobbing.

Skil"der (?), v. i. To beg; to pilfer; to skelder. [Prov. Eng.& Scot.]
Sir W. Scott.

Skil"ful (?), a. See Skilful.

Skill (?), n. [Icel. skil a distinction, discernment; akin to skilja to
separate, divide, distinguish, Sw. skilja,. skille to separate, skiel
reason, right, justice, Sw. skäl reason, Lith. skelli to cleave. Cf.
Shell, Shoal, a multitude.] 1. Discrimination; judgment; propriety;
reason; cause. [Obs.] Shak. "As it was skill and right." Chaucer.

    For great skill is, he prove that he wrought.


[For with good reason he should test what he created.] Chaucer.

2. Knowledge; understanding. [Obsoles.]

    That by his fellowship he color might Both his estate and love from
    skill of any wight.


Spenser.

    Nor want we skill or art.


Milton.

3. The familiar knowledge of any art or science, united with readiness
and dexterity in execution or performance, or in the application of the
art or science to practical purposes; power to discern and execute;
ability to perceive and perform; expertness; aptitude; as, the skill of
a mathematician, physician, surgeon, mechanic, etc.

    Phocion, . . . by his great wisdom and skill at negotiations,
    diverted Alexander from the conquest of Athens.


Swift.

    Where patience her sweet skill imparts.


Keble.

4. Display of art; exercise of ability; contrivance; address. [Obs.]

    Richard . . . by a thousand princely skills, gathering so much corn
    as if he meant not to return.


Fuller.

5. Any particular art. [Obs.]

    Learned in one skill, and in another kind of learning unskillful.


Hooker.

Syn. -- Dexterity; adroitness; expertness; art; aptitude; ability. --
Skill, Dexterity, Adroitness. Skill is more intelligent, denoting
familiar knowledge united to readiness of performance. Dexterity, when
applied to the body, is more mechanical, and refers to habitual ease of
execution. Adroitness involves the same image with dexterity, and
differs from it as implaying a general facility of movement (especially
in avoidance of danger or in escaping from a difficalty). The same
distinctions apply to the figurative sense of the words. A man is
skillful in any employment when he understands both its theory and its
practice. He is dexterous when he maneuvers with great lightness. He is
adroit in the use od quick, sudden, and well-directed movements of the
body or the mind, so as to effect the object he has in view.

Skill (?), v. t. To know; to understand. [Obs.]

    To skill the arts of expressing our mind.


Barrow.

Skill, v. i. 1. To be knowing; to have understanding; to be dexterous
in performance. [Obs.]

    I can not skill of these thy ways.


Herbert.

2. To make a difference; to signify; to matter; -- used impersonally.
Spenser.

    What skills it, if a bag of stones or gold About thy neck do drown
    thee?


Herbert.

    It skills not talking of it.


Sir W. Scott.

Skilled (?), a. Having familiar knowledge united with readiness and
dexterity in its application; familiarly acquainted with; expert;
skillful; -- often followed by in; as, a person skilled in drawing or
geometry.

Skil"let (?), n. [OF. escuelette, dim. of escuelle a porringer, F.
ecuelle, fr. L. scutella, dim. of scutra, scuta, a dish. Cf. Scuttle a
basket.] A small vessel of iron, copper, or other metal, with a handle,
used for culinary purpose, as for stewing meat.

Skill"ful (?), a. [Written also skilful.] 1. Discerning; reasonable;
judicious; cunning. [Obs.] "Of skillful judgment." Chaucer.

2. Possessed of, or displaying, skill; knowing and ready; expert;
well-versed; able in management; as, a skillful mechanic; -- often
followed by at, in, or of; as, skillful at the organ; skillful in
drawing.

    And they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are
    skillful of lamentations to wailing.


Amos v. 16.

Syn. -- Expert; skilled; dexterous; adept; masterly; adroit; clever;
cunning.

-- Skill"ful*ly, adv. -- Skill"ful*ness, n.

Skil`li*ga*lee" (?), n. A kind of thin, weak broth or oatmeal porridge,
served out to prisoners and paupers in England; also, a drink made of
oatmeal, sugar, and water, sometimes used in the English navy or army.
[Written also skilligolee, skillygalee, etc.]

Skil"ling (?), n. [Cf. Sheeling.] A bay of a barn; also, a slight
addition to a cottage. [Prov. Eng.]

Skil"ling, n. [Sw. & Dan. See Shilling.] A money od account in Sweden,
Norwey, Denmark, and North Germany, and also a coin. It had various
values, from three fourths of a cent in Norway to more than two cents
in Lübeck.

Skill"-less, a. Wanting skill. Shak.

Skilts (?), n. pl. A kind of large, coarse, short trousers formerly
worn. [Local, U. S.] Bartlett.

Skil"ty (?), n. The water rail. [Prov. Eng.]

Skim (skm), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skimmed (skmd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Skimming.] [Cf. Sw. skymma to darken. &radic;158. See Scum.] 1. To
clear (a liquid) from scum or substance floating or lying thereon, by
means of a utensil that passes just beneath the surface; as, to skim
milk; to skim broth.

2. To take off by skimming; as, to skim cream.

3. To pass near the surface of; to brush the surface of; to glide
swiftly along the surface of.

    Homer describes Mercury as flinging himself from the top of
    Olympus, and skimming the surface of the ocean.


Hazlitt.

4. Fig.: To read or examine superficially and rapidly, in order to cull
the principal facts or thoughts; as, to skim a book or a newspaper.

Skim, v. i. 1. To pass lightly; to glide along in an even, smooth
course; to glide along near the surface.

    Not so when swift Camilla scours the plain, Flies o'er the
    unbending corn, and skims along the main.


Pope.

2. To hasten along with superficial attention.

    They skim over a science in a very superficial survey.


I. Watts.

3. To put on the finishing coat of plaster.

Skim, a. Contraction of Skimming and Skimmed.

Skim coat, the final or finishing coat of plaster. -- Skim colter, a
colter for paring off the surface of land. -- Skim milk, skimmed milk;
milk from which the cream has been taken.

Skim, n. Scum; refuse. Bryskett.

Skim"back` (skm"bk`), n. (Zoöl.) The quillback. [Local, U.S.]

Skim"ble-scam`ble (?), a. [A reduplication of scamble.] Rambling;
disorderly; unconnected. [Colloq.]

    Such a deal of skimble-scamble stuff.


Shak.

Skim"i*try (?), n. See Skimmington.

Skim"mer (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, skims; esp., a utensil with
which liquids are skimmed.

2. (Zoöl.) Any species of longwinged marine birds of the genus
Rhynchops, allied to the terns, but having the lower mandible
compressed and much longer than the upper one. These birds fly rapidly
along the surface of the water, with the lower mandible immersed, thus
skimming out small fishes. The American species (R. nigra) is common on
the southern coasts of the United States. Called also scissorbill, and
shearbill.

3. (Zoöl.) Any one of several large bivalve shells, sometimes used for
skimming milk, as the sea clams, and large scallops.

<! p. 1350 !>

Skim"mer*ton (?), n. See Skimmington.

Skim"ming (?), n. 1. The act of one who skims.

2. That which is skimmed from the surface of a liquid; -- chiefly used
in the plural; as, the skimmings of broth.

Skim"ming*ly, adv. In a skimming manner.

Skim"ming*ton (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain. Perhaps the name of some
notorius scold.] A word employed in the phrase, To ride Skimmington;
that is to ride on a horse with a woman, but behind her, facing
backward, carrying a distaff, and accompanied by a procession of
jeering neighbors making mock music; a cavalcade in ridicule of a
henpecked man. The custom was in vogue in parts of England.

Skimp (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skimped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skimping.]
[Cf. Skinch, Scamp, v. t.] 1. To slight; to do carelessly; to scamp.
[Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U.S.]

2. To make insufficient allowance for; to scant; to scrimp. [Prov. Eng.
& Colloq. U. S.]

Skimp, v. i. To save; to be parsimonious or niggardly. [Prov. Eng. &
Colloq. U.S.]

Skimp, a. Scanty. [Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U.S.]

Skin (?), n. [Icel. skinn; akin to Sw. skinn, Dan. skind, AS. scinn, G.
schined to skin.] 1. (Anat.) The external membranous integument of an
animal.

In man, and the vertebrates generally, the skin consist of two layers,
an outer nonsensitive and nonvascular epidermis, cuticle, or skarfskin,
composed of cells which are constantly growing and multiplying in the
deeper, and being thrown off in the superficial, layers; and an inner
sensitive, and vascular dermis, cutis, corium, or true skin, composed
mostly of connective tissue.

2. The hide of an animal, separated from the body, whether green, dry,
or tanned; especially, that of a small animal, as a calf, sheep, or
goat.

3. A vessel made of skin, used for holding liquids. See Bottle, 1.
"Skins of wine." Tennyson.

4. The bark or husk of a plant or fruit; the exterior coat of fruits
and plants.

5. (Naut.) (a) That part of a sail, when furled, which remains on the
outside and covers the whole. Totten. (b) The covering, as of planking
or iron plates, outside the framing, forming the sides and bottom of a
vessel; the shell; also, a lining inside the framing.

Skin friction, Skin resistance (Naut.), the friction, or resistance,
caused by the tendency of water to adhere to the immersed surface
(skin) of a vessel. -- Skin graft (Surg.), a small portion of skin used
in the process of grafting. See Graft, v. t., 2. -- Skin moth (Zoöl.),
any insect which destroys the prepared skins of animals, especially the
larva of Dermestes and Anthrenus. -- Skin of the teeth, nothing, or
next to nothing; the least possible hold or advantage. Job xix. 20. --
Skin wool, wool taken from dead sheep.

Skin, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skinned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skinning.] 1. To
strip off the skin or hide of; to flay; to peel; as, to skin an animal.

2. To cover with skin, or as with skin; hence, to cover superficially.

    It will but skin and film the ulcerous place.


Shak.

3. To strip of money or property; to cheat. [Slang]

Skin, v. i. 1. To become covered with skin; as, a wound skins over.

2. To produce, in recitation, examination, etc., the work of another
for one's own, or to use in such exercise cribs, memeoranda, etc.,
which are prohibited. [College Cant, U.S.]

Skin"bound` (?), a. Having the skin adhering closely and rigidly to the
flesh; hidebound.

Skinbound disease. (Med.) See Sclerema neonatorum, under Sclerema.

Skinch (?), v. t. & i. [imp. & p. p. Skinched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Skinching.] [Cf. Scant.] To give scant measure; to squeeze or pinch in
order to effect a saving. [Prev. Eng. & Colloq. U.S.]

Skin"-deep` (?), a. Not deeper than the skin; hence, superficial.
Lowell.

Skin"flint` (?), n. [Skin + flint.] A penurious person; a miser; a
niggard. Sir W. Scott.

Skin"ful (?), n.; pl. Skinfuls (&?;). As much as a skin can hold.

Skink (?), n. [L. scincus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;.] [Written also scink.]
(Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of regularly scaled harmless
lizards of the family Scincidæ, common in the warmer parts of all the
continents.

The officinal skink (Scincus officinalis) inhabits the sandy plains of
South Africa. It was believed by the ancients to be a specific for
various diseases. A common slender species (Seps tridactylus) of
Southern Europe was formerly believed to produce fatal diseases in
cattle by mere contact. The American skinks include numerous species of
the genus Eumeces, as the blue-tailed skink (E. fasciatus) of the
Eastern United States. The ground skink, or ground lizard (Oligosoma
laterale) inhabits the Southern United States.

Skink, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skinked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skinking.]
[Icel. skenja; akin to Sw. skäka, Dan. skienke, AS. scencan, D. & G.
schenken. As. scencan is usually derived from sceonc, sceanc, shank, a
hollow bone being supposed to have been used to draw off liquor from a
cask. &radic;161. See Shank, and cf. Nunchion.] To draw or serve, as
drink. [Obs.]

    Bacchus the wine them skinketh all about.


Chaucer.

    Such wine as Ganymede doth skink to Jove.


Shirley.

Skink, v. i. To serve or draw liquor. [Obs.]

Skink, n. Drink; also, pottage. [Obs.] Bacon.

Skink"er (?), n. One who serves liquor; a tapster.

Skin"less (?), a. Having no skin, or a very thin skin; as, skinless
fruit.

Skin"ner (?), n. 1. One who skins.

2. One who deals in skins, pelts, or hides.

Skin"ni*ness (?), n. Quality of being skinny.

Skin"ny (?), a. Consisting, or chiefly consisting, of skin; wanting
flesh. "Her skinny lips." Shak.

    He holds him with a skinny hand.


Coleridge.

Skip (?), n. [See Skep.] 1. A basket. See Skep. [Obs. or Prov. Eng. &
Scot.]

2. A basket on wheels, used in cotton factories.

3. (Mining) An iron bucket, which slides between guides, for hoisting
mineral and rock.

4. (Sugar Manuf.) A charge of sirup in the pans.

5. A beehive; a skep.

Skip, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Skipped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skipping.] [OE.
skippen, of uncertain origin; cf. Icel. skopa run, skoppa to spin like
a top, OSw. & dial. Sw. skimmpa to run, skimpa, skompa, to hop, skip;
or Ir. sgiob to snatch, Gael. sgiab to start or move suddenly, to
snatch, W. ysgipio to snatch.] 1. To leap lightly; to move in leaps and
hounds; -- commonly implying a sportive spirit.

    The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to-day, Had he thy reason, would
    he skip and play?


Pope.

    So she drew her mother away skipping, dancing, and frisking
    fantastically.


Hawthorne.

2. Fig.: To leave matters unnoticed, as in reading, speaking, or
writing; to pass by, or overlook, portions of a thing; -- often
followed by over.

Skip, v. t. 1. To leap lightly over; as, to skip the rope.

2. To pass over or by without notice; to omit; to miss; as, to skip a
line in reading; to skip a lesson.

    They who have a mind to see the issue may skip these two chapters.


Bp. Burnet.

3. To cause to skip; as, to skip a stone. [Colloq.]

Skip, n. 1. A light leap or bound.

2. The act of passing over an interval from one thing to another; an
omission of a part.

3. (Mus.) A passage from one sound to another by more than a degree at
once. Busby.

Skip kennel, a lackey; a footboy. [Slang.] Swift. -- Skip mackerel.
(Zoöl.) See Bluefish, 1.

Skip"jack` (?), n. 1. An upstart. [Obs.] Ford.

2. (Zoöl.) An elater; a snap bug, or snapping beetle.

3. (Zoöl.) A name given to several kinds of a fish, as the common
bluefish, the alewife, the bonito, the butterfish, the cutlass fish,
the jurel, the leather jacket, the runner, the saurel, the saury, the
threadfish, etc.

4. (Naut.) A shallow sailboat with a rectilinear or V-shaped cross
section.

Skip"per (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, skips.

2. A young, thoughtless person. Shak.

3. (Zoöl.) The saury (Scomberesox saurus).

4. The cheese maggot. See Cheese fly, under Cheese.

5. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of small butterflies of the
family Hesperiadæ; -- so called from their peculiar short, jerking
flight.

Skip"per, n. [D. schipper. See Shipper, and Ship.] 1. (Naut.) The
master of a fishing or small trading vessel; hence, the master, or
captain, of any vessel.

2. A ship boy. [Obs.] Congreve.

Skip"pet (?), n. [Cf. Icel. skip, E. skipper. See Ship.] 1. A small
boat; a skiff. [Obs.]

    A little skippet floating did appear.


Spenser.

2. A small round box for keeping records. [Obs.]

Skip"ping*ly (?), adv. In a skipping manner; by skips, or light leaps.

Skirl (?), v. t.& i. [Of Scand. origin, and originally the same word as
E. shrill.] To utter in a shrill tone; to scream. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Skirl, n. A shrill cry or sound. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Skirl"cock` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The missel thrush; -- so called from its
harsh alarm note. [Prev. Eng.]

Skirl"crake` (?), n. The turnstone. [Prev. Eng.]

Skirl"ing, n. A shrill cry or sound; a crying shrilly; a skirl. [Prov.
Eng. & Scot.] Sir W. Scott.

    When the skirling of the pipes cleft the air his cold eyes
    softened.


Mrs. J. H. Ewing.

Skirl"ing, n. (Zoöl.) A small trout or salmon; -- a name used loosely.
[Prov. Eng.]

Skir"mish (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Skirmished (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Skirmishing.] [OE. skirmishen, scarmishen, OF. escremir, eskermir, to
fence, fight, F. escrimer, of German origin; cf. OHG. scirmen to
protect, defend, G. schirmen, OHG. scirm, scerm, protection, shield, G.
schirm; perhaps akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a sunshade. Cf. Scaramouch,
Scrimmage.] To fight slightly or in small parties; to engage in a
skirmish or skirmishes; to act as skirmishers.

Skir"mish, n.[OE. scarmishe, scrymishe. See Skirmish, v. i.] 1. A
slight fight in war; a light or desultory combat between detachments
from armies, or between detached and small bodies of troops.

2. A slight contest.

    They never meet but there's a skirmish of wit.


Shak.

Skir"mish*er (?), n. One who skirmishes. Specifically: pl. (Mil.)
Soldiers deployed in loose order, to cover the front or flanks of an
advancing army or a marching column.

Skirr (?), v. t. [Cf. Scur, Scurry.] To ramble over in order to clear;
to scour. [Archaic] Shak.

Skirr, v. i. To scour; to scud; to run. [Archaic]

Skirr, n. (Zoöl.) A tern. [Prov. Eng.]

Skir"ret (?), n. [A corrupted form equivalent to sugarwort.] (Bot.) An
umbelliferous plant (Sium, or Pimpinella, Sisarum). It is a native of
Asia, but has been long cultivated in Europe for its edible clustered
tuberous roots, which are very sweet.

Skir"rhus (?), n. (Med.) See Scirrhus.

Skirt (?), n. [OE. skyrt, of Scand. origin; cf. Icel. skyrta a shirt,
Sw. skört a skirt, skjorta a shirt. See Shirt.] 1. The lower and loose
part of a coat, dress, or other like garment; the part below the waist;
as, the skirt of a coat, a dress, or a mantle.

2. A loose edging to any part of a dress. [Obs.]

    A narrow lace, or a small skirt of ruffled linen, which runs along
    the upper part of the stays before, and crosses the breast, being a
    part of the tucker, is called the modesty piece.


Addison.

3. Border; edge; margin; extreme part of anything "Here in the skirts
of the forest." Shak.

4. A petticoat.

5. The diaphragm, or midriff, in animals. Dunglison.

Skirt, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skirted; p. pr. & vb. n. Skirting.] 1. To
cover with a skirt; to surround.

    Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold.


Milton.

2. To border; to form the border or edge of; to run along the edge of;
as, the plain was skirted by rows of trees. "When sundown skirts the
moor." Tennyson.

Skirt, v. t. To be on the border; to live near the border, or
extremity.

    Savages . . . who skirt along our western frontiers.


S. S. Smith.

Skirt"ing, n. 1. (Arch.) A skirting board. [R.]

2. Skirts, taken collectivelly; material for skirts.

Skirting board, the board running around a room on the wall next the
floor; baseboard.

Skit (?), v. t. [Prov. E. skitto slide, as adj., hasty, precipitate, of
Scand. origin, and akin to E. shoot, v.t.; cf. Icel. skyti, skytja,
skytta, a marksman, shooter, skjta to shoot, skta a taunt. &radic;159.
See Shoot.] To cast reflections on; to asperse. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]
Crose.

Skit, n. 1. A reflection; a jeer or gibe; a sally; a brief satire; a
squib. Tooke.

    A similar vein satire upon the emptiness of writers is given in his
    "Tritical Essay upon the Faculties of the Human Mind;" but that is
    a mere skit compared with this strange performance.


Leslie Stephen.

2. A wanton girl; a light wench. [Obs.]

Skit"tish (?), a. [See Skit, v. t.] 1. Easily frightened; timorous;
shy; untrustworthy; as, a skittish colt. "A restiff, skittish jade."
L'Estrange.

2. Wanton; restive; freakish; volatile; changeable; fickle. "Skittish
Fortune's hall." Shak.

-- Skit"tish*ly, adv. -- Skit"tish*ness, n.

Skit"tle (?), a. Pertaining to the game of skittles.

Skittle alley, an alley or court in which the game of skittles is
played. -- Skittle ball, a disk or flattish ball of wood for throwing
at the pins in the game of skittles.

Skit"tle-dog` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The piked dogfish.

Skit"tles (?), n. pl. [Of Scand. origin. &radic;159. See Shoot, v. t.,
and cf. Shuttle, Skit, v. t.] An English game resembling ninepins, but
played by throwing wooden disks, instead of rolling balls, at the pins.

Skit"ty (?), n. [Cf. Skittish.] (Zoöl.) A rail; as, the water rail
(called also skitty cock, and skitty coot); the spotted crake (Porzana
maruetta), and the moor hen. [Prov. Eng.]

Skive (?), n. [Cf. Icel. skfa a shaving, slice, E. shive, sheave.] The
iron lap used by diamond polishers in finishing the facets of the gem.

Skive (?), v. t. To pare or shave off the rough or thick parts of
(hides or leather).

Skiv"er (?), n. [Cf. Skewer, Shiver a fragment.] 1. An inferior quality
of leather, made of split sheepskin, tanned by immersion in sumac, and
dyed. It is used for hat linings, pocketbooks, bookbinding, etc.

2. The cutting tool or machine used in splitting leather or skins, as
sheepskins.

Ski"ving (?), n. 1. The act of paring or splitting leather or skins.

2. A piece made in paring or splitting leather; specifically, the part
from the inner, or flesh, side.

Sklayre (?), n. [Cf. G. schleier.] A vell. [Obs.]

Sklere (?), v. t. To shelter; to cover. [Obs.]

{ Skol"e*cite (?), Skol"e*zite (?) }, n. (Min.) See Scolecite.

Skonce (?), n. See Sconce.

Skop"ster (skp"str), n. The saury. [Prov. Eng.]

Skor"o*dite (?), n. (Min.) See Scorodite.

Skout (?), n. (Zoöl.) A guillemot.

Sko"witz (?), n. [Nisqually (American Indian) name.] (Zoöl.) The silver
salmon.

Skreen (?), n. & v. See Screen. [Obs.]

Skrike (?), v. i. & t. To shriek. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Skrike, n. (Zoöl.) The missel thrush. [Prov. Eng.]

Skrim"mage (?), n. See Scrimmage.

Skrimp (?), v. t. See Scrimp.

Skringe (?), v. i. See Scringe.

Skrite (?), n. (Zoöl.) The skrike. [Prov. Eng.]

Sku"a (?), n. [Icel. sk&?;fr, sk&?;mr.] (Zoöl.) Any jager gull;
especially, the Megalestris skua; -- called also boatswain.

Skue (?), a. & n. See Skew.

Skulk (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Skulked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Skulking.]
[Of Scand. origin; cf. Dan. skulke to spare or save one's self, to play
the truant, Sw. skolka to be at leisure, to shirk, Icel. skolla. Cf.
Scowl.] To hide, or get out of the way, in a sneaking manner; to lie
close, or to move in a furtive way; to lurk. "Want skulks in holes and
crevices." W. C. Bryant.

    Discovered and defeated of your prey, You skulked behind the fence,
    and sneaked away.


Dryden.

Skulk, n. [Cf. Icel. skollr, skolli, a fox, and E. skulk, v.i.] A
number of foxes together. Wright.

<! p. 1351 !>

{ Skulk (?), Skulk"er (?), } n. One who, or that which, skulks.

Skulk"ing*ly, adv. In a skulking manner.

Skull (?), n. [See School a multitude.] A school, company, or shoal.
[Obs.]

    A knavish skull of boys and girls did pelt at him.


Warner.

    These fishes enter in great flotes and skulls.


Holland.

Skull, n. [OE. skulle, sculle, scolle; akin to Scot. skull, skoll, a
bowl, Sw. skalle skull, skal a shell, and E. scale; cf. G. hirnschale,
Dan. hierneskal. Cf. Scale of a balance.] 1. (Anat.) The skeleton of
the head of a vertebrate animal, including the brain case, or cranium,
and the bones and cartilages of the face and mouth. See Illusts. of
Carnivora, of Facial angles under Facial, and of Skeleton, in Appendix.

In many fishes the skull is almost wholly cartilaginous but in the
higher vertebrates it is more or less completely ossified, several
bones are developed in the face, and the cranium is made up, wholly or
partially, of bony plates arranged in three segments, the frontal,
parietal, and occipital, and usually closely united in the adult.

2. The head or brain; the seat of intelligence; mind.

    Skulls that can not teach, and will not learn.


Cowper.

3. A covering for the head; a skullcap. [Obs. & R.]

    Let me put on my skull first.


Beau. & Fl.

4. A sort of oar. See Scull.

Skull and crossbones, a symbol of death. See Crossbones.

Skull"cap` (?), n. 1. A cap which fits the head closely; also,
formerly, a headpiece of iron sewed inside of a cap for protection.

2. (Bot.) Any plant of the labiate genus Scutellaria, the calyx of
whose flower appears, when inverted, like a helmet with the visor
raised.

3. (Zoöl.) The Lophiomys.

Mad-dog skullcap (Bot.), an American herb (Scetellaria lateriflora)
formerly prescribed as a cure for hydrophobia.

Skull"fish` (?), n. A whaler's name for a whale more than two years
old.

Skul"pin (?), n. (Zoöl.) See Sculpin.

Skun (?), n. & v. See Scum.

Skunk (?), n. [Contr. from the Abenaki (American Indian) seganku.]
(Zoöl.) Any one of several species of American musteline carnivores of
the genus Mephitis and allied genera. They have two glands near the
anus, secreting an extremely fetid liquid, which the animal ejects at
pleasure as a means of defense.

The common species of the Eastern United States (Mephitis mephitica) is
black with more or less white on the body and tail. The spotted skunk
(Spilogale putorius), native of the Southwestern United States and
Mexico, is smaller than the common skunk, and is variously marked with
black and white.

Skunk bird, Skunk blackbird (Zoöl.), the bobolink; -- so called because
the male, in the breeding season, is black and white, like a skunk. --
Skunk cabbage (Bot.), an American aroid herb (Symplocarpus fœtidus>)
having a reddish hornlike spathe in earliest spring, followed by a
cluster of large cabbagelike leaves. It exhales a disagreeable odor.
Also called swamp cabbage. -- Skunk porpoise. (Zoöl.) See under
Porpoise.

Skunk, v. t. In games of chance and skill: To defeat (an opponent) (as
in cards) so that he fails to gain a point, or (in checkers) to get a
king. [Colloq. U. S.]

Skunk"ball` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The surf duck.

Skunk"head` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The surf duck. (b) A duck (Camptolaimus
Labradorus) which formerly inhabited the Atlantic coast of New England.
It is now supposed to be extinct. Called also Labrador duck, and pied
duck.

Skunk"ish, a. Like the skunk, especially in odor.

Skunk"top` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The surf duck.

Skunk"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) Skunk cabbage.

Skur"ry (?), n. & v. See Scurry.

Skute (?), n. [Icel. sk&?;ta; akin to Sw. skuta, Dan. skude, D. schuit,
Lg. schüte, and E. schoot, v.t.] A boat; a small vessel. [Obs.] Sir R.
Williams.

Skut"ter*ud*ite (?), n. [From Skutterud, in Norway, whence it is
obtained.] (Min.) A mineral of a bright metallic luster and tin-white
to pale lead- gray color. It consists of arsenic and cobalt.

Sky (sk), n.; pl. Skies (skz). [OE. skie a cloud, Icel. sk; akin to Sw.
& Dan. sky; cf. AS. sca, scwa, shadow, Icel. skuggi; probably from the
same root as E. scum. &radic;158. See Scum, and cf. Hide skin,
Obscure.] 1. A cloud. [Obs.]

    [A wind] that blew so hideously and high, That it ne lefte not a
    sky In all the welkin long and broad.


Chaucer.

2. Hence, a shadow. [Obs.]

    She passeth as it were a sky.


Gower.

3. The apparent arch, or vault, of heaven, which in a clear day is of a
blue color; the heavens; the firmament; - - sometimes in the plural.

    The Norweyan banners flout the sky.


Shak.

4. The wheather; the climate.

    Thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered
    body this extremity of the skies.


Shak.

Sky is often used adjectively or in the formation of self-explaining
compounds; as, sky color, skylight, sky-aspiring, sky-born,
sky-pointing, sky- roofed, etc.

Sky blue, an azure color. -- Sky scraper (Naut.), a skysail of a
triangular form. Totten. -- Under open sky, out of doors. "Under open
sky adored." Milton.

Sky, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Skied (?) or Skyed; p. pr. & vb. n. Skying
(?).] 1. To hang (a picture on exhibition) near the top of a wall,
where it can not be well seen. [Colloq.]

    Brother Academicians who skied his pictures.


The Century.

2. To throw towards the sky; as, to sky a ball at cricket. [Colloq.]

Sky"-blue (?), a. Having the blue color of the sky; azure; as, a
sky-blue stone. Wordsworth.

Skyed (?), a. Surrounded by sky. [Poetic & R.] "The skyed mountain."
Thomson.

Skye" ter"ri*er (?). (Zoöl.) See Terrier.

Sky"ey (?), a. Like the sky; ethereal; being in the sky. "Skyey
regions." Thackeray.

    Sublime on the towers of my skyey bowers, Lightning, my pilot,
    sits.


Shelley.

Sky"-high` (?), adv. & a. Very high. [Colloq.]

Sky"ish, a. Like the sky, or approaching the sky; lofty; ethereal. [R.]
Shak.

Sky"lark` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A lark that mounts and sings as it files,
especially the common species (Alauda arvensis) found in Europe and in
some parts of Asia, and celebrated for its melodious song; -- called
also sky laverock. See under Lark.

The Australian skylark (Cincloramphus cantillans) is a pipit which has
the habit of ascending perpendicularly like a skylark, but it lacks the
song of a true lark. The Missouri skylark is a pipit (Anthus Spraguei)
of the Western United States, resembling the skylark in habit and song.

Sky"lark"ing, n. The act of running about the rigging of a vessel in
sport; hence, frolicking; scuffing; sporting; carousing. [Colloq.]

Sky"light` (?), n. A window placed in the roof of a building, in the
ceiling of a room, or in the deck of a ship, for the admission of light
from above.

Sky"rock`et (?), n. A rocket that ascends high and burns as it flies; a
species of fireworks.

Sky"sail (?), n. (Naut.) The sail set next above the royal. See Illust.
under Sail.

Sky"ward (?), a. & adv. Toward the sky.

Slab (?), n. [OE. slabbe, of uncertain origin; perhaps originally
meaning, a smooth piece, and akin to slape, Icel. sleipr slippery, and
E. slip, v. i.] 1. A thin piece of anything, especially of marble or
other stone, having plane surfaces. Gwilt.

2. An outside piece taken from a log or timber in sawing it into
boards, planks, etc.

3. (Zoöl.) The wryneck. [Prov. Eng.]

4. (Naut.) The slack part of a sail.

Slab line (Naut.), a line or small rope by which seamen haul up the
foot of the mainsail or foresail. Totten.

Slab, a. [Cf. Gael. & Ir. slaib mud, mire left on a river strand, and
E. slop puddle.] Thick; viscous. [Obs.]

    Make the gruel thick and slab.


Shak.

Slab, n. That which is slimy or viscous; moist earth; mud; also, a
puddle. [Obs.] Evelyn.

Slab"ber (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slabbered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slabbering.] [OE. slaberen; akin to LG. & D. slabbern, G. schlabbern,
LG. & D. slabben, G. schlabben, Icel. slafra. Cf. Slaver, Slobber,
Slubber.] To let saliva or some liquid fall from the mouth carelessly,
like a child or an idiot; to drivel; to drool. [Written also slaver,
and slobber.]

Slab"ber, v. t. 1. To wet and foul spittle, or as if with spittle.

    He slabbered me over, from cheek to cheek, with his great tongue.


Arbuthnot.

2. To spill liquid upon; to smear carelessly; to spill, as liquid foed
or drink, in careless eating or drinking.

    The milk pan and cream pot so slabbered and tost That butter is
    wanting and cheese is half lost.


Tusser.

Slab"ber, n. Spittle; saliva; slaver.

Slab"ber (?), n. [See 1st Slab.] (Mach.) (a) A saw for cutting slabs
from logs. (b) A slabbing machine.

Slab"ber*er (?), n. One who slabbers, or drools; hence, an idiot.

Slab"ber*y (?), a. Like, or covered with, slabber or slab; slippery;
sloppy.

Slab"bi*ness (?), n. Quality of being slabby.

Slab"bing (?), a. [See 1st Slab.] Adapted for forming slabs, or for
dressing flat surfaces.

Slabbing machine, a milling machine.

Slab"by (?), a. [Compar. Slabbier (?); superl. Slabbiest.] [See Slab,
a.] 1. Thick; viscous.

    They present you with a cup, and you must drink of a slabby stuff.


Selden.

2. Sloppy; slimy; miry. See Sloppy. Gay.

Slab"-sid`ed (?), a. Having flat sides; hence, tall, or long and lank.
[Colloq. U. S.]

Slack (?), n. [Cf. Slag.] Small coal; also, coal dust; culm. Raymond.

Slack, n. [Icel. slakki a slope on a mountain edge.] A valley, or
small, shallow dell. [Prov. Eng.] Grose.

Slack, a. [Compar. Slacker (?); superl. Slackest.] [OE. slak, AS.
sleac; akin to OS. slak, OHG. slah, Prov. G. schlack, Icel. slakr, Sw.
slak; cf. Skr. sj to let loose, to throw. Cf. Slake.] Lax; not tense;
not hard drawn; not firmly extended; as, a slack rope.

2. Weak; not holding fast; as, a slack hand. Milton.

3. Remiss; backward; not using due diligence or care; not earnest or
eager; as, slack in duty or service.

    The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
    slackness.


2 Pet. iii. 9.

4. Not violent, rapid, or pressing; slow; moderate; easy; as, business
is slack. "With slack pace." Chaucer.

    C&?;sar . . . about sunset, hoisting sail with a slack southwest,
    at midnight was becalmed.


Milton.

Slack in stays (Naut.), slow in going about, as a ship. -- Slack water,
the time when the tide runs slowly, or the water is at rest; or the
interval between the flux and reflux of the tide. -- Slack-water
navigation, navigation in a stream the depth of which has been
increased, and the current diminished, by a dam or dams.

Syn. -- Loose; relaxed; weak; remiss; backward; abated; diminished;
inactive; slow; tardy; dull.

Slack (?), adv. Slackly; as, slack dried hops.

Slack, n. The part of anything that hangs loose, having no strain upon
it; as, the slack of a rope or of a sail.

{ Slack (?), Slack"en (?), } v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slacked (?), Slackened
(&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Slacking, Slackening.] [See Slack, a.] 1. To
become slack; to be made less tense, firm, or rigid; to decrease in
tension; as, a wet cord slackens in dry weather.

2. To be remiss or backward; to be negligent.

3. To lose cohesion or solidity by a chemical combination with water;
to slake; as, lime slacks.

4. To abate; to become less violent.

    Whence these raging fires Will slacken, if his breath stir not
    their flames.


Milton.

5. To lose rapidity; to become more slow; as, a current of water
slackens.

6. To languish; to fail; to flag.

7. To end; to cease; to desist; to slake. [Obs.]

    That through your death your lineage should slack.


Chaucer.

    They will not of that firste purpose slack.


Chaucer.

{ Slack, Slack"en, } v. t. 1. To render slack; to make less tense or
firm; as, to slack a rope; to slacken a bandage. Wycklif (Acts xxvii.
40)

2. To neglect; to be remiss in. [Obs.] Shak.

    Slack not the pressage.


Dryden.

3. To deprive of cohesion by combining chemically with water; to slake;
as, to slack lime.

4. To cause to become less eager; to repress; to make slow or less
rapid; to retard; as, to slacken pursuit; to slacken industry. "Rancor
for to slack." Chaucer.

    I should be grieved, young prince, to think my presence Unbent your
    thoughts, and slackened 'em to arms.


Addison.

    In this business of growing rich, poor men should slack their pace.


South.

    With such delay Well plased, they slack their course.


Milton.

5. To cause to become less intense; to mitigate; to abate; to ease.

    To respite, or deceive, or slack thy pain Of this ill mansion.


Milton.

Air-slacked lime, lime slacked by exposure to the air, in consequence
of the absorption of carton dioxide and water, by which it is converted
into carbonate of lime and hydrate of lime.

Slack"en (?), n. (Metal.) A spongy, semivitrifled substance which
miners or smelters mix with the ores of metals to prevent their fusion.
[Written also slakin.]

Slack"ly, adv. In a slack manner. Trench.

Slack"ness, n. The quality or state of being slack.

Slade (?), n. [AS. sl&?;d.] 1. A little dell or valley; a flat piece of
low, moist ground. [Obs.] Drayton.

2. The sole of a plow.

Slag (?), n. [Sw. slagg, or LG. slacke, whence G. schlacke; originally,
perhaps, the splinters struck off from the metal by hammering. See
Slay, v. t.] 1. The dross, or recrement, of a metal; also, vitrified
cinders.

2. The scoria of a volcano.

Slag furnace, or Slag hearth (Metal.), a furnace, or hearth, for
extracting lead from slags or poor ore. -- Slag wool, mineral wool. See
under Mineral.

Slag"gy (?), a. Of or pertaining to slag; resembling slag; as, slaggy
cobalt.

Slaie (?), n. [See Sley.] A weaver's reed; a sley.

Slake (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slaked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slaking.]
[OE. slaken to render slack, to slake, AS. sleacian, fr. sleac slack.
See Slack, v. & a.] 1. To allay; to quench; to extinguish; as, to slake
thirst. "And slake the heavenly fire." Spenser.

    It could not slake mine ire nor ease my heart.


Shak.

2. To mix with water, so that a true chemical combination shall take
place; to slack; as, to slake lime.

Slake, v. i. 1. To go out; to become extinct. "His flame did slake."
Sir T. Browne.

2. To abate; to become less decided. [R.] Shak.

3. To slacken; to become relaxed. "When the body's strongest sinews
slake." [R.] Sir J. Davies.

4. To become mixed with water, so that a true chemical combination
takes place; as, the lime slakes.

Slake trough, a trough containing water in which a blacksmith cools a
forging or tool.

Slake"less, a. Not capable of being slaked.

Slak"in (?), n. (Metal.) Slacken.

Slam (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slammed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slamming.]
[Of Scand. origin; cf. Icel. slamra, slambra, sl&?;ma, Norw. slemba,
slemma, dial. Sw. slämma.] 1. To shut with force and a loud noise; to
bang; as, he slammed the door.

2. To put in or on some place with force and loud noise; -- usually
with down; as, to slam a trunk down on the pavement.

3. To strike with some implement with force; hence, to beat or cuff.
[Prov. Eng.]

4. To strike down; to slaughter. [Prov. Eng.]

5. To defeat (opponents at cards) by winning all the tricks of a deal
or a hand. Hoyle.

To slam to, to shut or close with a slam. "He slammed to the door." W.
D. Howells.

Slam, v. i. To come or swing against something, or to shut, with sudden
force so as to produce a shock and noise; as, a door or shutter slams.

Slam, n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, slams.

2. The shock and noise produced in slamming.

    The slam and the scowl were lost upon Sam.


Dickens.

3. (Card Playing) Winning all the tricks of a deal.

4. The refuse of alum works. [Prov. Eng.]

Slam"-bang` (?), adv. With great violence; with a slamming or banging
noise. [Colloq.]

{ Slam"kin (?), Slam"mer*kin (?), } n. [Cf. G. schlampe, schlamp, dim.
schlämpchen; schlampen to dangle, to be slovenly in one's dress.] A
slut; a slatternly woman. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Slan"der (?), n. [OE. sclandere, OF. esclandre, esclandle, escandre, F.
esclandre, fr. L. scandalum, Gr. &?;&?;&?; a snare, stumbling block,
offense, scandal; probably originally, the spring of a trap, and akin
to Skr. skand to spring, leap. See Scan, and cf. Scandal.] 1. A false
tale or report maliciously uttered, tending to injure the reputation of
another; the malicious utterance of defamatory reports; the
dissemination of malicious tales or suggestions to the injury of
another.

    Whether we speak evil of a man to his face or behind his back; the
    former way, indeed, seems to be the most generous, but yet is a
    great fault, and that which we call "reviling;" the latter is more
    mean and base, and that which we properly call "slander", or
    "Backbiting."


Tillotson.

    [We] make the careful magistrate The mark of slander.


B. Jonson.

<! p. 1352 !>

2. Disgrace; reproach; dishonor; opprobrium.

    Thou slander of thy mother's heavy womb.


Shak.

3. (Law) Formerly, defamation generally, whether oral or written; in
modern usage, defamation by words spoken; utterance of false,
malicious, and defamatory words, tending to the damage and derogation
of another; calumny. See the Note under Defamation. Burril.

Slan"der (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slandered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slandering.] 1. To defame; to injure by maliciously uttering a false
report; to tarnish or impair the reputation of by false tales
maliciously told or propagated; to calumniate.

    O, do not slander him, for he is kind.


Shak.

2. To bring discredit or shame upon by one's acts.

    Tax not so bad a voice To slander music any more than once.


Shak.

Syn. -- To asperse; defame; calumniate; vilify; malign; belie;
scandalize; reproach. See Asperse.

Slan"der*er (?), n. One who slanders; a defamer; a calumniator. Jer.
Taylor.

Slan"der*ous (?), a. 1. Given or disposed to slander; uttering slander.
"Slanderous tongue." Shak.

2. Embodying or containing slander; calumnious; as, slanderous words,
speeches, or reports.

-- Slan"der*ous*ly, adv. -- Slan"der*ous*ness, n.

Slang (?), imp. of Sling. Slung. [Archaic]

Slang, n. Any long, narrow piece of land; a promontory. [Local, Eng.]
Holland.

Slang, n. [Cf. Sling.] A fetter worn on the leg by a convict. [Eng.]

Slang, n. [Said to be of Gypsy origin; but probably from Scand., and
akin to E. sling; cf. Norw. sleng a slinging, an invention, device,
slengja to sling, to cast, slengja kjeften (literally, to sling the
jaw) to use abusive language, to use slang, slenjeord (ord = word) an
insulting word, a new word that has no just reason for being.] Low,
vulgar, unauthorized language; a popular but unauthorized word, phrase,
or mode of expression; also, the jargon of some particular calling or
class in society; low popular cant; as, the slang of the theater, of
college, of sailors, etc.

Slang, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slanged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slanging.] To
address with slang or ribaldry; to insult with vulgar language.
[Colloq.]

    Every gentleman abused by a cabman or slanged by a bargee was bound
    there and then to take off his coat and challenge him to
    fisticuffs.


London Spectator.

Slang"i*ness (?), n. Quality of being slangy.

Slan"gous (?), a. Slangy. [R.] John Bee.

Slang"-whang`er (?), n. [Slang + whang to beat.] One who uses abusive
slang; a ranting partisan. [Colloq. or Humorous] W. Irving.

Slang"y (?), a. Of or pertaining to slang; of the nature of slang;
disposed to use slang. [Written also slangey.]

Slank (?), imp. & p. p. of Slink.

Slant (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slanted; p. pr. & vb. n. Slanting.] [OE.
slenten to slope, slide; cf. Sw. slinta to slide.] To be turned or
inclined from a right line or level; to lie obliquely; to slope.

    On the side of younder slanting hill.


Dodsley.

Slant, v. t. To turn from a direct line; to give an oblique or sloping
direction to; as, to slant a line.

Slant, n. 1. A slanting direction or plane; a slope; as, it lies on a
slant.

2. An oblique reflection or gibe; a sarcastic remark.

Slant or wind, a local variation of the wind from its general
direction.

Slant, a. [Cf. dial. Sw. slant. See Slant, v. i.] Inclined from a
direct line, whether horizontal or perpendicular; sloping; oblique.
"The slant lightning." Milton.

Slant"ing, a. Oblique; sloping. -- Slant"ing*ly, adv.

{ Slant"wise` (?), Slant"ly }, adv. In an inclined direction;
obliquely; slopingly.

Slap (?), n. [OE. slappe; akin to LG. slappe, G. schlappe; probably of
imitative origin.] A blow, esp. one given with the open hand, or with
something broad.

Slap, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slapped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slapping.] To
strike with the open hand, or with something broad.

Slap, adv. [Cf. LG. slap, G. schlapp. See Slap, n.] With a sudden and
violent blow; hence, quickly; instantly; directly. [Colloq.] "The
railroad cars drive slap into the city." Thackeray.

Slap"dash` (?), adv. [Slap + dash.] 1. In a bold, careless manner; at
random. [Colloq.]

2. With a slap; all at once; slap. [Colloq.] Prior.

Slap"dash`, v. t. To apply, or apply something to, in a hasty,
careless, or rough manner; to roughcast; as, to slapdash mortar or
paint on a wall, or to slapdash a wall. [Colloq.] Halliwell.

Slape (?), a. [Icel. sleipr slippery; akin to E. slip.] Slippery;
smooth; crafty; hypocritical. [Prov. Eng.]

Slape ale, plain ale, as opposed to medicated or mixed ale. [Prov.
Eng.]

Slape"face` (?), n. A soft-spoken, crafty hypocrite. [Prov. Eng.]
Halliwell.

Slap"jack` (?), n. A flat batter cake cooked on a griddle; a flapjack;
a griddlecake. [Local, U.S.]

Slap"per (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, slaps.

2. Anything monstrous; a whopper. [Slang] Grose.

{ Slap"per (?), Slap"ping (?), } a. Very large; monstrous; big.
[Slang.]

Slash, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slashed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slashing.] [OE.
slaschen, of uncertain origin; cf. OF. esclachier to break, esclechier,
esclichier, to break, and E. slate, slice, slit, v. t.] 1. To cut by
striking violently and at random; to cut in long slits.

2. To lash; to ply the whip to. [R.] King.

3. To crack or snap, as a whip. [R.] Dr. H. More.

Slash, v. i. To strike violently and at random, esp. with an edged
instrument; to lay about one indiscriminately with blows; to cut
hastily and carelessly.

    Hewing and slashing at their idle shades.


Spenser.

Slash, n. 1. A long cut; a cut made at random.

2. A large slit in the material of any garment, made to show the lining
through the openings.

3. [Cf. Slashy.] pl. Swampy or wet lands overgrown with bushes. [Local,
U.S.] Bartlett.

Slashed (?), a. 1. Marked or cut with a slash or slashes; deeply
gashed; especially, having long, narrow openings, as a sleeve or other
part of a garment, to show rich lining or under vesture.

    A gray jerkin, with scarlet and slashed sleeves.


Sir W. Scott.

2. (Bot.) Divided into many narrow parts or segments by sharp
incisions; laciniate.

Slash"er (?), n. (Textile Manuf.) A machine for applying size to warp
yarns.

Slash" pine" (?). (Bot.) A kind of pine tree (Pinus Cubensis) found in
Southern Florida and the West Indies; -- so called because it grows in
"slashes."

Slash"y (?), a. [Cf. Sw. slaska to dabble in water. Cf. Slush.] Wet and
dirty; slushy. [Prov. Eng.]

Slat (?), n. [CF. Slot a bar.] A thin, narrow strip or bar of wood or
metal; as, the slats of a window blind.

Slat, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slatted; p. pr. & vb. n. Slatting.] [OE.
slatten; cf. Icel. sletta to slap, to dab.] 1. To slap; to strike; to
beat; to throw down violently. [Prov. Eng. & Colloq. U.S.]

    How did you kill him? Slat[t]ed his brains out.


Marston.

2. To split; to crack. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

3. To set on; to incite. See 3d Slate. [Prov. Eng.]

Slatch (?), n. [See Slack.] (Naut.) (a) The period of a transitory
breeze. (b) An interval of fair weather. (c) The loose or slack part of
a rope; slack.

Slate (?), n. [OE. slat, OF. esclat a shiver, splinter, F. éclat, fr.
OF. esclater to shiver, to chip, F. éclater, fr. OHG. sliezen to tear,
slit, split, fr. slzan to slit, G. schleissen. See Slit, v. t., and cf.
Eclat.] 1. (Min.) An argillaceous rock which readily splits into thin
plates; argillite; argillaceous schist.

2. Any rock or stone having a slaty structure.

3. A prepared piece of such stone. Especially: (a) A thin, flat piece,
for roofing or covering houses, etc. (b) A tablet for writing upon.

4. An artificial material, resembling slate, and used for the above
purposes.

5. A thin plate of any material; a flake. [Obs.]

6. (Politics) A list of candidates, prepared for nomination or for
election; a list of candidates, or a programme of action, devised
beforehand. [Cant, U.S.] Bartlett.

Adhesive slate (Min.), a kind of slate of a greenish gray color, which
absorbs water rapidly, and adheres to the tongue; whence the name. --
Aluminous slate, or Alum slate (Min.), a kind of slate containing
sulphate of alumina, -- used in the manufacture of alum. -- Bituminous
slate (Min.), a soft species of sectile clay slate, impregnated with
bitumen. -- Hornblende slate (Min.), a slaty rock, consisting
essentially of hornblende and feldspar, useful for flagging on account
of its toughness. -- Slate ax or axe, a mattock with an ax end, used in
shaping slates for roofs, and making holes in them for the nails. --
Slate clay (Geol.), an indurated clay, forming one of the alternating
beds of the coal measures, consisting of an infusible compound of
alumina and silica, and often used for making fire bricks. Tomlinson.
-- Slate globe, a globe the surface of which is made of an artificial
slatelike material. -- Slate pencil, a pencil of slate, or of
soapstone, used for writing on a slate. -- Slate rocks (Min.), rocks
which split into thin laminæ, not necessarily parallel to the
stratification; foliated rocks. -- Slate spar (Min.), a variety of
calcite of silvery white luster and of a slaty structure. --
Transparent slate, a plate of translucent material, as ground glass,
upon which a copy of a picture, placed beneath it, can be made by
tracing.

Slate, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slated; p. pr. & vb. n. Slating.] 1. To
cover with slate, or with a substance resembling slate; as, to slate a
roof; to slate a globe.

2. To register (as on a slate and subject to revision), for an
appointment. [Polit. Cant]

Slate, v. t. [Cf. AS. slting a privilege of hunting.] To set a dog
upon; to bait; to slat. See 2d Slat, 3. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.] [Written
also slete.] Ray.

Slate"-col`or (?). A dark bluish gray color.

Slate"-gray` (?), a. Of a dark gray, like slate.

Slat"er (?), n. One who lays slates, or whose occupation is to slate
buildings.

Slat"er, n. (Zoöl.) Any terrestrial isopod crustacean of the genus
Porcellio and allied genera; a sow bug.

Slat"ing, n. 1. The act of covering with slate, slates, or a substance
resembling slate; the work of a slater.

2. Slates, collectively; also, material for slating.

Slatt (?), n. [See Slat a strip of board.] A slab of stone used as a
veneer for coarse masonry. Knight.

Slat"ter (?), v. i. [E. slat to throw or dash about.] To be careless,
negligent, or aswkward, esp. with regard to dress and neatness; to be
wasteful. Ray.

Slat"tern (?), n. A woman who is negligent of her dress or house; one
who is not neat and nice.

Slat"tern, a. Resembling a slattern; sluttish; slatterny. "The slattern
air." Gay.

Slat"tern (?), v. t. To consume carelessly or wastefully; to waste; --
with away. [R.] Chesterfield.

Slat"tern*li*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being slatternly;
slovenliness; untidiness.

Slat"tern*ly, a. Resembling a slattern; sluttish; negligent; dirty. --
adv. In a slatternly manner.

Slat"ter*pouch` (?), n. A dance or game played by boys, requiring
active exercise. [Obs.] Gayton.

Slat"ting (?), Slats, collectively.

Slat"ting, n. The violent shaking or flapping of anything hanging loose
in the wind, as of a sail, when being hauled down.

Slat"y (?), a. [From Slate.] Resembling slate; having the nature,
appearance, or properties, of slate; composed of thin parallel plates,
capable of being separated by splitting; as, a slaty color or texture.

Slaty cleavage (Min.), cleavage, as of rocks, into thin leaves or
plates, like those of slate; -- applied especially to those cases in
which the planes of cleavage are not parallel to the planes of
stratification. It is now believed to be caused by the compression
which the strata have undergone. -- Slaty gneiss (Min.), a variety of
gneiss in which the scales of mica or crystals of hornblende, which are
usually minute, form thin laminæ, rendering the rock easily cleavable.

Slaugh"ter (?), n. [OE. slautir, slaughter, slaghter, Icel. sltr slain
flesh, modified by OE. slaught, slaht, slaughter, fr. AS. sleaht a
stroke, blow; both from the root of E. slay. See Slay, v. t., and cf.
Onslaught.] The act of killing. Specifically: (a) The extensive,
violent, bloody, or wanton destruction of life; carnage.

    On war and mutual slaughter bent.


Milton.

(b) The act of killing cattle or other beasts for market.

Syn. -- Carnage; massacre; butchery; murder; havoc.

Slaugh"ter, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slaughtered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slaughtering.] 1. To visit with great destruction of life; to kill; to
slay in battle.

    Your castle is surprised; your wife and babes Savagely slaughtered.


Shak.

2. To butcher; to kill for the market, as beasts.

Slaugh"ter*er (?), n. One who slaughters.

Slaugh"ter*house` (?), n. A house where beasts are butchered for the
market.

Slaugh"ter*man (?), n.; pl. Slaughtermen (&?;). One employed in
slaughtering. Shak.

Slaugh"ter*ous (?), a. Destructive; murderous. Shak. M. Arnold. --
Slaugh"ter*ous*ly, adv.

Slav (?), n.;pl. Slavs (#). [A word originally meaning, intelligible,
and used to contrast the people so called with foreigners who spoke
languages unintelligible to the Slavs; akin to OSlav. slovo a word,
slava fame, Skr. çru to hear. Cf. Loud.] (Ethnol.) One of a race of
people occupying a large part of Eastern and Northern Europe, including
the Russians, Bulgarians, Roumanians, Servo-Croats, Slovenes, Poles,
Czechs, Wends or Sorbs, Slovaks, etc. [Written also Slave, and Sclav.]

Slave (?), n. See Slav.

Slave (?), n. [Cf. F. esclave, D. slaaf, Dan. slave, sclave, Sw. slaf,
all fr. G. sklave, MHG. also slave, from the national name of the
Slavonians, or Sclavonians (in LL. Slavi or Sclavi), who were
frequently made slaves by the Germans. See Slav.] 1. A person who is
held in bondage to another; one who is wholly subject to the will of
another; one who is held as a chattel; one who has no freedom of
action, but whose person and services are wholly under the control of
another.

    thou our slave, Our captive, at the public mill our drudge?


Milton.

2. One who has lost the power of resistance; one who surrenders himself
to any power whatever; as, a slave to passion, to lust, to strong
drink, to ambition.

3. A drudge; one who labors like a slave.

4. An abject person; a wretch. Shak.

Slave ant (Zoöl.), any species of ants which is captured and enslaved
by another species, especially Formica fusca of Europe and America,
which is commonly enslaved by Formica sanguinea. -- Slave catcher, one
who attempted to catch and bring back a fugitive slave to his master.
-- Slave coast, part of the western coast of Africa to which slaves
were brought to be sold to foreigners. -- Slave driver, one who
superintends slaves at their work; hence, figuratively, a cruel
taskmaster. -- Slave hunt. (a) A search after persons in order to
reduce them to slavery. Barth. (b) A search after fugitive slaves,
often conducted with bloodhounds. -- Slave ship, a vessel employed in
the slave trade or used for transporting slaves; a slaver. -- Slave
trade, the business of dealing in slaves, especially of buying them for
transportation from their homes to be sold elsewhere. -- Slave trader,
one who traffics in slaves.

Syn. -- Bond servant; bondman; bondslave; captive; henchman; vassal;
dependent; drudge. See Serf.

Slave, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slaved (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slaving.] To
drudge; to toil; to labor as a slave.

Slave, v. t. To enslave. Marston.

Slave"born` (?), a. Born in slavery.

Slave"hold`er (?), n. One who holds slaves.

Slave"hold`ing, a. Holding persons in slavery.

Slave*oc"ra*cy (?), n. See Slavocracy.

Slav"er (?), n. 1. A vessel engaged in the slave trade; a slave ship.

2. A person engaged in the purchase and sale of slaves; a slave
merchant, or slave trader.

    The slaver's hand was on the latch, He seemed in haste to go.


Longfellow.

Slav"er (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slavered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slavering.] [Cf. Icel. slafra. See Slabber.] 1. To suffer spittle,
etc., to run from the mouth.

2. To be besmeared with saliva. Shak.

Slav"er, v. t. To smear with saliva issuing from the mouth; to defile
with drivel; to slabber.

Slav"er, n. Saliva driveling from the mouth.

    Of all mad creatures, if the learned are right, It is the slaver
    kills, and not the bite.


Pope.

Slav"er*er (?), n. A driveler; an idiot.

<! p. 1353 !>

Slav"er*ing (?), a. Drooling; defiling with saliva. -- Slav"er*ing*ly,
adv.

Slav"er*y (?), n.; pl. Slaveries (#). [See 2d Slave.] 1. The condition
of a slave; the state of entire subjection of one person to the will of
another.

    Disguise thyself as thou wilt, still, slavery, said I, still thou
    art a bitter draught!


Sterne.

    I wish, from my soul, that the legislature of this state [Virginia]
    could see the policy of a gradual abolition of slavery. It might
    prevent much future mischief.


Washington.

2. A condition of subjection or submission characterized by lack of
freedom of action or of will.

    The vulgar slaveries rich men submit to.


C. Lever.

    There is a slavery that no legislation can abolish, -- the slavery
    of caste.


G. W. Cable.

3. The holding of slaves.

Syn. -- Bondage; servitude; inthrallment; enslavement; captivity; bond
service; vassalage.

Slav"ey (?), n. A maidservant. [Colloq. & Jocose Eng.]

Slav"ic (?), a. Slavonic. -- n. The group of allied languages spoken by
the Slavs.

Slav"ish (?), a. Of or pertaining to slaves; such as becomes or befits
a slave; servile; excessively laborious; as, a slavish life; a slavish
dependance on the great. -- Slav"ish*ly, adv. -- Slav"ish*ness, n.

Slav"ism (?), n. The common feeling and interest of the Slavonic race.

Slav*oc"ra*cy (?), n. [Slave + -cracy, as in democracy.] The persons or
interest formerly representing slavery politically, or wielding
political power for the preservation or advancement of slavery. [U. S.]

{ Sla*vo"ni*an (?), Sla*von"ic (?), } a. 1. Of or pertaining to
Slavonia, or its inhabitants.

2. Of or pertaining to the Slavs, or their language.

Sla*vo"ni*an, n. A native or inhabitant of Slavonia; ethnologically, a
Slav.

{ Slav"o*phil (?), Slav"o*phile (?), } n. [Slavic + Gr. &?;&?;&?;
loving.] One, not being a Slav, who is interested in the development
and prosperity of that race.

Slaw (?), n. [D. sla, contr. fr. salade, OD. salaet, salad. See Salad.]
Sliced cabbage served as a salad, cooked or uncooked.

{ Slaw, Slaw"en } (?), obs. p. p. of Slee, to slay.

    With a sword drawn out he would have slaw himself.


Wyclif (Acts xvi. 27.)

Slay (?), v. t. [imp. Slew (?); p. p. Slain (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slaying.] [OE. slan, sl&?;n, sleen, slee, AS. sleán to strike, beat,
slay; akin to OFries. sl, D. slaan, OS. & OHG. slahan, G. schlagen,
Icel. sl, Dan. slaae, Sw. sl&?;, Goth. slahan; perhaps akin to L.
lacerare to tear to pieces, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, E. lacerate. Cf.
Slaughter, Sledge a hammer, Sley.] To put to death with a weapon, or by
violence; hence, to kill; to put an end to; to destroy.

    With this sword then will I slay you both.


Chaucer.

    I will slay the last of them with the sword.


Amos ix. 1.

    I'll slay more gazers than the basilisk.


Shak.

Syn. -- To kill; murder; slaughter; butcher.

Slay"er (?), n. One who slays; a killer; a murderer; a destroyer of
life.

Sla"zy (sl"z), a. See Sleazy.

Sle (sl), v. t. To slay. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sleave (slv), n. [Cf. Dan. slöif, a knot loop, Sw. slejf, G. schleife a
knot, sliding knot, and E. slip, v.i.] (a) The knotted or entangled
part of silk or thread. (b) Silk not yet twisted; floss; -- called also
sleave silk.

    Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleave of care.


Shak.

Sleave, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sleaved (slvd); p. pr. & vb. n. Sleaving.]
To separate, as threads; to divide, as a collection of threads; to
sley; -- a weaver's term.

Sleaved (slvd), a. Raw; not spun or wrought; as, sleaved thread or
silk. Holinshed.

Slea"zi*ness (?), n. Quality of being sleazy.

Slea"zy (sl"z), a. [Cf. G. schleissig worn out, threadbare, from
schleissen to slit, split, decay, or E. leasy.] Wanting firmness of
texture or substance; thin; flimsy; as, sleazy silk or muslin. [Spelt
also slazy.]

Sled (sld), n. [Akin to D. slede, G. schlitten, OHG. slito, Icel.
sleði, Sw. släde, Dan. slæde, and E. slide, v. See Slide, and cf.
Sledge a vehicle, Sleigh.] 1. A vehicle on runners, used for conveying
loads over the snow or ice; -- in England called sledge.

2. A small, light vehicle with runners, used, mostly by young persons,
for sliding on snow or ice.

Sled, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sledded; p. pr. & vb. n. Sledding.] To convey
or transport on a sled; as, to sled wood or timber.

Sled"ding (?), n. 1. The act of transporting or riding on a sled.

2. The state of the snow which admits of the running of sleds; as, the
sledding is good.

Sledge (slj), n. [Perhaps from sleds, pl. of sled, confused with sledge
a hammer. See Sled, n.] 1. A strong vehicle with low runners or low
wheels; or one without wheels or runners, made of plank slightly turned
up at one end, used for transporting loads upon the snow, ice, or bare
ground; a sled.

2. A hurdle on which, formerly, traitors were drawn to the place of
execution. [Eng.] Sir W. Scott.

3. A sleigh. [Eng.]

4. A game at cards; -- called also old sledge, and all fours.

Sledge (slj), v. i. & t. [imp. & p. p. Sledged (sljd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sledging.] To travel or convey in a sledge or sledges. Howitt.

Sledge, n. [AS. slecge,from sleán to strike, beat. See Slay, v. t.] A
large, heavy hammer, usually wielded with both hands; -- called also
sledge hammer.

    With his heavy sledge he can it beat.


Spenser.

Slee (sl), v. t. [See Slay.] To slay. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sleek (slk), a. [Compar. Sleeker (-r); superl. Sleekest.] [OE. slik;
akin to Icel. slkr, and OE. sliken to glide, slide, G. schleichen, OHG.
slhhan, D. slik, slijk, mud, slime, and E. slink. Cf. Slick, Slink.] 1.
Having an even, smooth surface; smooth; hence, glossy; as, sleek hair.
Chaucer.

    So sleek her skin, so faultless was her make.


Dryden.

2. Not rough or harsh.

    Those rugged names to our like mouths grow sleek.


Milton.

Sleek, adv. With ease and dexterity. [Low]

Sleek, n. That which makes smooth; varnish. [R.]

Sleek, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sleeked (?);p. pr. & vb. n. Sleeking.] To
make even and smooth; to render smooth, soft, and glossy; to smooth
over.

    Sleeking her soft alluring locks.


Milton.

    Gentle, my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks.


Shak.

Sleek"ly, adv. In a sleek manner; smoothly.

Sleek"ness, n. The quality or state of being sleek; smoothness and
glossiness of surface.

Sleek"y (?), a. 1. Of a sleek, or smooth, and glossy appearance.
Thomson.

2. Fawning and deceitful; sly. [Scot.]

Sleep (?), obs. imp. of Sleep. Slept. Chaucer.

Sleep, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slept (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sleeping.] [OE.
slepen, AS. sl&?;pan; akin to OFries. sl&?;pa, OS. slpan, D. slapen,
OHG. slfan, G. schlafen, Goth. sl&?;pan, and G. schlaff slack, loose,
and L. labi to glide, slide, labare to totter. Cf. Lapse.] 1. To take
rest by a suspension of the voluntary exercise of the powers of the
body and mind, and an apathy of the organs of sense; to slumber.
Chaucer.

    Watching at the head of these that sleep.


Milton.

2. Figuratively: (a) To be careless, inattentive, or uncouncerned; not
to be vigilant; to live thoughtlessly.

    We sleep over our happiness.


Atterbury.

(b) To be dead; to lie in the grave.

    Them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.


1 Thess. iv. 14.

(c) To be, or appear to be, in repose; to be quiet; to be unemployed,
unused, or unagitated; to rest; to lie dormant; as, a question sleeps
for the present; the law sleeps.

    How sweet the moonlight sleep upon this bank!


Shak.

Sleep, v. t. 1. To be slumbering in; -- followed by a cognate object;
as, to sleep a dreamless sleep. Tennyson.

2. To give sleep to; to furnish with accomodations for sleeping; to
lodge. [R.] Blackw. Mag.

To sleep away, to spend in sleep; as, to sleep away precious time. --
To sleep off, to become free from by sleep; as, to sleep off drunkeness
or fatigue.

Sleep, n. [AS. slp; akin to OFries. slp, OS. slp, D. slaap, OHG. slf,
G. schlaf, Goth. slps. See Sleep, v. i.] A natural and healthy, but
temporary and periodical, suspension of the functions of the organs of
sense, as well as of those of the voluntary and rational soul; that
state of the animal in which there is a lessened acuteness of sensory
perception, a confusion of ideas, and a loss of mental control,
followed by a more or less unconscious state. "A man that waketh of his
sleep." Chaucer.

    O sleep, thou ape of death.


Shak.

Sleep is attended by a relaxation of the muscles, and the absence of
voluntary activity for any rational objects or purpose. The pulse is
slower, the respiratory movements fewer in number but more profound,
and there is less blood in the cerebral vessels. It is susceptible of
greater or less intensity or completeness in its control of the powers.

Sleep of plants (Bot.), a state of plants, usually at night, when their
leaflets approach each other, and the flowers close and droop, or are
covered by the folded leaves.

Syn. -- Slumber; repose; rest; nap; doze; drowse.

Sleep"-at-noon" (?), n. (Bot.) A plant (Tragopogon pratensis) which
closes its flowers at midday; a kind of goat's beard. Dr. Prior.

Sleep"-charged` (?), a. Heavy with sleep.

Sleep"er (?), n. 1. One who sleeps; a slumberer; hence, a drone, or
lazy person.

2. That which lies dormant, as a law. [Obs.] Bacon.

3. A sleeping car. [Colloq. U.S.]

4. (Zoöl.) An animal that hibernates, as the bear.

5. (Zoöl.) (a) A large fresh-water gobioid fish (Eleotris dormatrix).
(b) A nurse shark. See under Nurse.

Sleep"er, n. [Cf. Norw. sleip a sleeper (a timber), as adj., slippery,
smooth. See Slape.] Something lying in a reclining posture or position.
Specifically: --

(a) One of the pieces of timber, stone, or iron, on or near the level
of the ground, for the support of some superstructure, to steady
framework, to keep in place the rails of a railway, etc.; a
stringpiece.

(b) One of the joists, or roughly shaped timbers, laid directly upon
the ground, to receive the flooring of the ground story. [U.S.]

(c) (Naut.) One of the knees which connect the transoms to the after
timbers on the ship's quarter.

(d) (Naut.) The lowest, or bottom, tier of casks.

Sleep"ful (?), a. Strongly inclined to sleep; very sleepy. --
Sleep"ful*ness, n.

Sleep"i*ly (?), adv. In a sleepy manner; drowsily.

Sleep"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being sleepy.

Sleep"ing, a. & n. from Sleep.

Sleeping car, a railway car or carrriage, arranged with apartments and
berths for sleeping. -- Sleeping partner (Com.), a dormant partner. See
under Dormant. -- Sleeping table (Mining), a stationary inclined
platform on which pulverized ore is washed; a kind of buddle.

Sleep"ish (?), a. Disposed to sleep; sleepy; drowsy.

    Your sleepish, and more than sleepish, security.


Ford.

Sleep"less, a. 1. Having no sleep; wakeful.

2. Having no rest; perpetually agitated. "Biscay's sleepless bay."
Byron.

-- Sleep"less*ly, adv. -- Sleep"less*ness, n.

Sleep"mark`en (?), n. (Zoöl.) See 1st Hag, 4.

Sleep"wak`er (?), n. On in a state of magnetic or mesmeric sleep.

Sleep"wak`ing, n. The state of one mesmerized, or in a partial and
morbid sleep.

Sleep"walk`er (?), n. One who walks in his sleep; a somnambulist.

Sleep"walk`ing, n. Walking in one's sleep.

Sleep"y (?), a. [Compar. Sleepier (?); superl. Sleepiest.] [AS.
sl&?;pig. See Sleep, n.] 1. Drowsy; inclined to, or overcome by, sleep.
Shak.

    She waked her sleepy crew.


Dryden.

2. Tending to induce sleep; soporiferous; somniferous; as, a sleepy
drink or potion. Chaucer.

3. Dull; lazy; heavy; sluggish. Shak.

    'Tis not sleepy business; But must be looked to speedily and
    strongly.


Shak.

4. Characterized by an absence of watchfulness; as, sleepy security.

Sleepy duck (Zoöl.), the ruddy duck.

Sleep"y*head` (?), n. 1. A sleepy person.

    To bed, to bed, says Sleepyhead.


Mother Goose.

2. (Zoöl.) The ruddy duck.

Sle"er (?), n. A slayer. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sleet (?), n. (Gun.) The part of a mortar extending from the chamber to
the trunnions.

Sleet, n. [OE. sleet; akin to MHG. sl&?;z, sl&?;ze hailstone, G.
schlosse; of uncertain origin.] Hail or snow, mingled with rain,
usually falling, or driven by the wind, in fine particles.

Sleet, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sleeted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sleeting.] To snow
or hail with a mixture of rain.

Sleetch (?), n. [Cf. Slush, Slutch.] Mud or slime, such as that at the
bottom of rivers. [Scot.]

Sleet"i*ness (?), n. The state of being sleety.

Sleet"y (?), a. Of or pertaining to sleet; characterized by sleet; as,
a sleety storm; sleety weather.

Sleeve (?), n. See Sleave, untwisted thread.

Sleeve, n. [OE. sleeve, sleve, AS. sl&?;fe, sl&?;fe; akin to sl&?;fan
to put on, to clothe; cf. OD. sloove the turning up of anything, sloven
to turn up one's sleeves, sleve a sleeve, G. schlaube a husk, pod.] 1.
The part of a garment which covers the arm; as, the sleeve of a coat or
a gown. Chaucer.

2. A narrow channel of water. [R.]

    The Celtic Sea, called oftentimes the Sleeve.


Drayton.

3. (Mach.) (a) A tubular part made to cover, sustain, or steady another
part, or to form a connection between two parts. (b) A long bushing or
thimble, as in the nave of a wheel. (c) A short piece of pipe used for
covering a joint, or forming a joint between the ends of two other
pipes.

Sleeve button, a detachable button to fasten the wristband or cuff. --
Sleeve links, two bars or buttons linked together, and used to fasten a
cuff or wristband. -- To laugh in the sleeve, to laugh privately or
unperceived, especially while apparently preserving a grave or serious
demeanor toward the person or persons laughed at; that is, perhaps,
originally, by hiding the face in the wide sleeves of former times. --
To pin, or hang, on the sleeve of, to be, or make, dependent upon.

Sleeve, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sleeved (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sleeving.] To
furnish with sleeves; to put sleeves into; as, to sleeve a coat.

Sleeved (?), a. Having sleeves; furnished with sleeves; -- often in
composition; as, long- sleeved.

Sleeve"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A squid.

Sleeve"hand` (?), n. The part of a sleeve nearest the hand; a cuff or
wristband. [Obs.] Shak.

Sleeve"less, a. [AS. sl&?;fleás.] 1. Having no sleeves.

2. Wanting a cover, pretext, or palliation; unreasonable; profitless;
bootless; useless. [Obs.] Shak.

    The vexation of a sleeveless errand.


Bp. Warburton.

Sleid (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sleided; p. pr. & vb. n. Sleiding.] [See
Sley.] To sley, or prepare for use in the weaver's sley, or slaie.
Shak.

Sleigh (?), a. Sly. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sleigh (?), n. [Cf. D. & LG. slede, slee, Icel. sle&?;i. See Sled.] A
vehicle moved on runners, and used for transporting persons or goods on
snow or ice; -- in England commonly called a sledge.

Sleigh bell, a small bell attached either to a horse when drawing a
slegh, or to the sleigh itself; especially a globular bell with a loose
ball which plays inside instead of a clapper.

Sleigh"ing, n. 1. The act of riding in a sleigh.

2. The state of the snow or ice which admits of running sleighs.

Sleight (?), n. [OE. sleighte, sleihte, sleithe, Icel. sl&?;g&?; (for
sl&?;g&?;) slyness, cunning, fr. sl&?;gr (for sl&?;gr) sly, cunning.
See Sly.] 1. Cunning; craft; artful practice. [Obs.] "His sleight and
his covin." Chaucer.

2. An artful trick; sly artifice; a feat so dexterous that the manner
of performance escapes observation.

    The world hath many subtle sleights.


Latimer.

3. Dexterous practice; dexterity; skill. Chaucer. "The juggler's
sleight." Hudibras.

Sleight of hand, legerdemain; prestidigitation.

<! p. 1354 !>

Sleight"ful (?), a. Cunning; dexterous. [Obs.]

Sleight"ly (?), adv. Cinningly. [Obs.] Huloet.

Sleight"y (?), a. Cinning; sly. [Obs.] Huloet.

Slen"der (?), a. [Compar. Slenderer (?); superl. Slenderest.] [OE.
slendre, sclendre, fr. OD. slinder thin, slender, perhaps through a
French form; cf. OD. slinderen, slidderen, to creep; perh. akin to E.
slide.] 1. Small or narrow in proportion to the length or the height;
not thick; slim; as, a slender stem or stalk of a plant. "A slender,
choleric man." Chaucer.

    She, as a veil down to the slender waist, Her unadorned golden
    tresses wore.


Milton.

2. Weak; feeble; not strong; slight; as, slender hope; a slender
constitution.

    Mighty hearts are held in slender chains.


Pope.

    They have inferred much from slender premises.


J. H. Newman.

    The slender utterance of the consonants.


J. Byrne.

3. Moderate; trivial; inconsiderable; slight; as, a man of slender
intelligence.

    A slender degree of patience will enable him to enjoy both the
    humor and the pathos.


Sir W. Scott.

4. Small; inadequate; meager; pitiful; as, slender means of support; a
slender pittance.

    Frequent begging makes slender alms.


Fuller.

5. Spare; abstemious; frugal; as, a slender diet.

    The good Ostorius often deigned To grace my slender table with his
    presence.


Philips.

6. (Phon.) Uttered with a thin tone; -- the opposite of broad; as, the
slender vowels long e and i.

-- Slen"der*ly, adv. -- Slen"der*ness, n.

Slent (?), n. & v. See Slant. [Obs.]

Slep (?), obs. imp. of Sleep. Slept. Chaucer.

Sle*pez" (?), n. [Russ. sliepets'.] (Zoöl.) A burrowing rodent (Spalax
typhlus), native of Russia and Asia Minor. It has the general
appearance of a mole, and is destitute of eyes. Called also mole rat.

Slept (?), imp. & p. p. of Sleep.

Sleuth (?), n. [Icel. slð. See Slot a track.] The track of man or beast
as followed by the scent. [Scot.] Halliwell.

Sleuth"hound` (?), n. [See Sleuth, and cf. Slothound.] (Zoöl.) A hound
that tracks animals by the scent; specifically, a bloodhound. [Spelt
variously slouthhound, sluthhound, etc.]

Slew (?), imp. of Slay.

Slew, v. t. See Slue.

Slewed (?), a. Somewhat drunk. [Slang]

Slewth (?), n. Sloth; idleness. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sley (?), n. [AS. sl&?;, fr. sleán to strike. See Slay, v. t.] 1. A
weaver's reed. [Spelt also slaie.]

2. A guideway in a knitting machine. Knight.

Sley, v. t. To separate or part the threads of, and arrange them in a
reed; -- a term used by weavers. See Sleave, and Sleid.

Slib"ber (?), a. Slippery. [Obs.] Holland.

Slice (?), n. [OE. slice, sclice, OF. esclice, from esclicier,
esclichier, to break to pieces, of German origin; cf. OHG. slzan to
split, slit, tear, G. schleissen to slit. See Slit, v. t.] 1. A thin,
broad piece cut off; as, a slice of bacon; a slice of cheese; a slice
of bread.

2. That which is thin and broad, like a slice. Specifically: (a) A
broad, thin piece of plaster. (b) A salver, platter, or tray. [Obs.]
(c) A knife with a thin, broad blade for taking up or serving fish;
also, a spatula for spreading anything, as paint or ink. (d) A plate of
iron with a handle, forming a kind of chisel, or a spadelike implement,
variously proportioned, and used for various purposes, as for stripping
the planking from a vessel's side, for cutting blubber from a whale, or
for stirring a fire of coals; a slice bar; a peel; a fire shovel.
[Cant] (e) (Shipbuilding) One of the wedges by which the cradle and the
ship are lifted clear of the building blocks to prepare for launching.
(f) (Printing) A removable sliding bottom to galley.

Slice bar, a kind of fire iron resembling a poker, with a broad, flat
end, for stirring a fire of coals, and clearing it and the grate bars
from clinkers, ashes, etc.; a slice.

Slice, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sliced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slicing (?).] 1.
To cut into thin pieces, or to cut off a thin, broad piece from.

2. To cut into parts; to divide.

3. To clear by means of a slice bar, as a fire or the grate bars of a
furnace.

Sli"cer (?), n. One who, or that which, slices; specifically, the
circular saw of the lapidary.

{ Slich (?), Slick (?) }, n. (Metal.) See Schlich.

Slick (?), a. [See Sleek.] Sleek; smooth. "Both slick and dainty."
Chapman.

Slick, v. t. To make sleek or smoth. "Slicked all with sweet oil."
Chapman.

Slick, n. (Joinery) A wide paring chisel.

Slick"en (?), a. Sleek; smooth. [Prov. Eng.]

Slick"ens (?), n. [Cf. Slick, n.] (Mining) The pulverized matter from a
quartz mill, or the lighter soil of hydraulic mines. [Local, U. S.]

Slick"en*sides` (?), n. 1. The smooth, striated, or partially polished
surfaces of a fissure or seam, supposed to have been produced by the
sliding of one surface on another.

2. A variety of galena found in Derbyshire, England.

Slick"er (?), n. That which makes smooth or sleek. Specifically: (a) A
kind of burnisher for leather. (b) (Founding) A curved tool for
smoothing the surfaces of a mold after the withdrawal of the pattern.

Slick"er, n. A waterproof coat. [Western U.S.]

Slick"ing, n. 1. The act or process of smoothing.

2. pl. (Min.) Narrow veins of ore.

Slick"ness, n. The state or quality of being slick; smoothness;
sleekness.

Slid (?), imp. & p. p. of Slide.

Slid"den (?), p. p. of Slide.

Slid"der (?), v. t. [AS. sliderian. See Slide, v. t.] To slide with
interruption. [Obs.] Dryden.

{ Slid"der, Slid"der*ly, Slid"der*y (?) }, a. [AS. slidor. See Slide,
v. t.] Slippery. [Obs.]

    To a drunk man the way is slidder.


Chaucer.

Slide (?), v. t. [imp. Slid (?); p. p. Slidden (?), Slid; p. pr. & vb.
n. Slidding (?).] [OE. sliden, AS. sldan; akin to MHG. slten, also to
AS. slidor slippery, E. sled, Lith. slidus slippery. Cf. Sled.] 1. To
move along the surface of any body by slipping, or without walking or
rolling; to slip; to glide; as, snow slides down the mountain's side.

2. Especially, to move over snow or ice with a smooth, uninterrupted
motion, as on a sled moving by the force of gravity, or on the feet.

    They bathe in summer, and in winter slide.


Waller.

3. To pass inadvertently.

    Beware thou slide not by it.


Ecclus. xxviii. 26.

4. To pass along smoothly or unobservedly; to move gently onward
without friction or hindrance; as, a ship or boat slides through the
water.

    Ages shall slide away without perceiving.


Dryden.

    Parts answering parts shall slide into a whole.


Pope.

5. To slip when walking or standing; to fall.

    Their foot shall slide in due time.


Deut. xxxii. 35.

6. (Mus.) To pass from one note to another with no perceptible
cassation of sound.

7. To pass out of one's thought as not being of any consequence. [Obs.
or Colloq.]

    With good hope let he sorrow slide.


Chaucer.

    With a calm carelessness letting everything slide.


Sir P. Sidney.

Slide, v. t. 1. To cause to slide; to thrust along; as, to slide one
piece of timber along another.

2. To pass or put imperceptibly; to slip; as, to slide in a word to
vary the sense of a question.

Slide, n. [AS. slde.] 1. The act of sliding; as, a slide on the ice.

2. Smooth, even passage or progress.

    A better slide into their business.


Bacon.

3. That on which anything moves by sliding. Specifically: (a) An
inclined plane on which heavy bodies slide by the force of gravity,
esp. one constructed on a mountain side for conveying logs by sliding
them down. (b) A surface of ice or snow on which children slide for
amusement.

4. That which operates by sliding. Specifically: (a) A cover which
opens or closes an aperture by sliding over it. (b) (Mach.) A moving
piece which is guided by a part or parts along which it slides. (c) A
clasp or brooch for a belt, or the like.

5. A plate or slip of glass on which is a picture or delineation to be
exhibited by means of a magic lantern, stereopticon, or the like; a
plate on which is an object to be examined with a microscope.

6. The descent of a mass of earth, rock, or snow down a hill or
mountain side; as, a land slide, or a snow slide; also, the track of
bare rock left by a land slide.

7. (Geol.) A small dislocation in beds of rock along a line of fissure.
Dana.

8. (Mus.) (a) A grace consisting of two or more small notes moving by
conjoint degrees, and leading to a principal note either above or
below. (b) An apparatus in the trumpet and trombone by which the
sounding tube is lengthened and shortened so as to produce the tones
between the fundamental and its harmonics.

9. (Phonetics) A sound which, by a gradual change in the position of
the vocal organs, passes imperceptibly into another sound.

10. (Steam Engine) (a) Same as Guide bar, under Guide. (b) A slide
valve.

Slide box (Steam Engine), a steam chest. See under Steam. -- Slide
lathe, an engine lathe. See under Lathe. -- Slide rail, a transfer
table. See under Transfer. -- Slide rest (Turning lathes), a
contrivance for holding, moving, and guiding, the cutting tool, made to
slide on ways or guides by screws or otherwise, and having compound
motion. -- Slide rule, a mathematical instrument consisting of two
parts, one of which slides upon the other, for the mechanical
performance of addition and subtraction, and, by means of logarithmic
scales, of multiplication and division. -- Slide valve. (a) Any valve
which opens and closes a passageway by sliding over a port. (b) A
particular kind of sliding valve, often used in steam engines for
admitting steam to the piston and releasing it, alternately, having a
cuplike cavity in its face, through which the exhaust steam passes. It
is situated in the steam chest, and moved by the valve gear. It is
sometimes called a D valve, -- a name which is also applied to a
semicylindrical pipe used as a sliding valve.

In the illustration, a is the cylinder of a steam engine, in which
plays the piston p; b the steam chest, receiving its supply from the
pipe i, and containing the slide valve s, which is shown as admitting
steam to one end of the cylinder through the port e, and opening
communication between the exhaust passage f and the port c, for the
release of steam from the opposite end of the cylinder.

Slide"groat (?), n. The game of shovelboard. [Obs.]

Slid"er (?), a. See Slidder. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Slid"er, n. 1. One who, or that which, slides; especially, a sliding
part of an instrument or machine.

2. (Zoöl.) The red-bellied terrapin (Pseudemys rugosa). [Local, U. S. ]

Slider pump, a form of rotary pump.

Slid"ing (?), a. 1. That slides or slips; gliding; moving smoothly.

2. Slippery; elusory. [Obs.]

    That sliding science hath me made so bare.


Chaucer.

Sliding friction (Mech.), the resistance one body meets with in sliding
along the surface of another, as distinguished from rolling friction.
-- Sliding gunter (Naut.), a topmast arranged with metallic fittings so
as to be hoisted and lowered by means of halyards. -- Sliding keel
(Naut), a movable keel, similar to a centeboard. -- Sliding pair.
(Mech.) See the Note under Pair, n., 7. -- Sliding rule. Same as Slide
rule, under Slide, n. -- Sliding scale. (a) A scale for raising or
lowering imposts in proportion to the fall or rise of prices. (b) A
variable scale of wages or of prices. (c) A slide rule. -- Sliding ways
(Naut.), the timber guides used in launching a vessel.

Sli*dom"e*ter (?), n. [Slide + -meter.] An instrument for indicating
and recording shocks to railway cars occasioned by sudden stopping.

Slight (?), n. Sleight. Spenser.

Slight, v. t. [Cf. D. slechten to level, to demolish.] 1. To overthrow;
to demolish. [Obs.] Clarendon.

2. To make even or level. [Obs.] Hexham.

3. To throw heedlessly. [Obs.]

    The rogue slighted me into the river.


Shak.

Slight (?), a. [Compar. Slighter (?); superl. Slightest.] [OE. sli&?;t,
sleght, probably from OD. slicht, slecht, simple, plain, D. slecht;
akin to OFries. sliucht, G. schlecht, schlicht, OHG. sleht smooth,
simple, Icel. sl&?;ttr smooth, Sw. slät, Goth. slaíhts; or uncertain
origin.] 1. Not decidedly marked; not forcible; inconsiderable;
unimportant; insignificant; not severe; weak; gentle; -- applied in a
great variety of circumstances; as, a slight (i. e., feeble) effort; a
slight (i. e., perishable) structure; a slight (i. e., not deep)
impression; a slight (i. e., not convincing) argument; a slight (i. e.,
not thorough) examination; slight (i. e., not severe) pain, and the
like. "At one slight bound." Milton.

    Slight is the subject, but not so the praise.


Pope.

    Some firmly embrace doctrines upon slight grounds.


Locke.

2. Not stout or heavy; slender.

    His own figure, which was formerly so slight.


Sir W. Scott.

3. Foolish; silly; weak in intellect. Hudibras.

Slight, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slighted; p. pr. & vb. n. Slighting.] To
disregard, as of little value and unworthy of notice; to make light of;
as, to slight the divine commands. Milton.

    The wretch who slights the bounty of the skies.


Cowper.

To slight off, to treat slightingly; to drive off; to remove. [R.] --
To slight over, to run over in haste; to perform superficially; to
treat carelessly; as, to slight over a theme. "They will but slight it
over." Bacon.

Syn. -- To neglect; disregard; disdain; scorn. -- Slight, Neglect. To
slight is stronger than to neglect. We may neglect a duty or person
from inconsiderateness, or from being over-occupied in other concerns.
To slight is always a positive and intentional act, resulting from
feelings of dislike or contempt. We ought to put a kind construction on
what appears neglect on the part of a friend; but when he slights us,
it is obvious that he is our friend no longer.

    Beware . . . lest the like befall . . . If they transgress and
    slight that sole command.


Milton.

    This my long-sufferance, and my day of grace, Those who neglect and
    scorn shall never taste.


Milton.

Slight, n. The act of slighting; the manifestation of a moderate degree
of contempt, as by neglect or oversight; neglect; indignity.

Syn. -- Neglect; disregard; inattention; contempt; disdain; scorn;
disgrace; indignity; disparagement.

Slight, adv. Slightly. [Obs. or Poetic]

    Think not so slight of glory.


Milton.

Slight"en (?), v. t. To slight. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Slight"er (?), n. One who slights.

Slight"ful (?), a. See Sleightful. [Obs.]

Slight"ing, a. Characterized by neglect or disregard.

Slight"ing*ly, adv. In a slighting manner.

Slight"ly, adv. 1. In a slight manner.

2. Slightingly; negligently. [Obs.] Shak.

Slight"ness, n. The quality or state of being slight; slenderness;
feebleness; superficiality; also, formerly, negligence; indifference;
disregard.

Slight"y (?), a. Slight. [Obs.] Echard.

Slik (slk), a. [See Such.] Such. [Obs. or Scot.]

Used by Chaucer as of the Northern dialect.

Slik"en*sides`, n. Same as Slickensides.

Sli"ly (?), adv. See Slyly. South.

Slim (slm), a. [Compar. Slimmer (?); superl. Slimmest.] [Formerly, bad,
worthless, weak, slight, awry, fr. D. slim; akin to G. schlimm, MHG.
slimp oblique, awry; of uncertain origin. The meaning of the English
word seems to have been influenced by slender.] 1. Worthless; bad.
[Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

2. Weak; slight; unsubstantial; poor; as, a slim argument. "That was a
slim excuse." Barrow.

3. Of small diameter or thickness in proportion to the height or
length; slender; as, a slim person; a slim tree. Grose.

Slime (?), n. [OE. slim, AS. slm; akin to D. slijm, G. schleim, MHG.
slmen to make smooth, Icel. slm slime, Dan. sliim; cf. L. limare to
file, polish, levis smooth, Gr. &?;&?;&?;; or cf. L. limus mud.] 1.
Soft, moist earth or clay, having an adhesive quality; viscous mud.

    As it [Nilus] ebbs, the seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters
    his grain.


Shak.

2. Any mucilaginous substance; any substance of a dirty nature, that is
moist, soft, and adhesive.

3. (Script.) Bitumen. [Archaic]

    Slime had they for mortar.


Gen. xi. 3.

<! p. 1355 !>

4. pl. (Mining) Mud containing metallic ore, obtained in the
preparatory dressing. Pryce.

5. (Physiol.) A mucuslike substance which exudes from the bodies of
certain animals. Goldsmith.

Slime eel. (Zoöl.) See 1st Hag, 4. -- Slime pit, a pit for the
collection of slime or bitumen.

Slime (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slimed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sliming.] To
smear with slime. Tennyson.

Slim"i*ly (?), adv. In a slimy manner.

Slim"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being slimy.

Slim"ly (?), adv. In a state of slimness; in a slim manner; slenderly.

Slim"ness, n. The quality or state of being slim.

Slim"sy (?), a. Flimsy; frail. [Colloq. U.S.]

Slim"y (?), a. [Compar. Slimier (?); superl. Slimiest.] Of or
pertaining to slime; resembling slime; of the nature of slime; viscous;
glutinous; also, covered or daubed with slime; yielding, or abounding
in, slime.

    Slimy things did crawl with legs Upon the slimy sea.


Coleridge.

Sli"ness (?), n. See Slyness.

Sling (?), n. [OE. slinge; akin to OD. slinge, D. slinger, OHG. slinga;
cf. OF. eslingue, of German origin. See Sling, v. t.] 1. An instrument
for throwing stones or other missiles, consisting of a short strap with
two strings fastened to its ends, or with a string fastened to one end
and a light stick to the other. The missile being lodged in a hole in
the strap, the ends of the string are taken in the hand, and the whole
whirled rapidly round until, by loosing one end, the missile is let fly
with centrifugal force.

2. The act or motion of hurling as with a sling; a throw; figuratively,
a stroke.

    The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune.


Shak.

    At one sling Of thy victorius arm, well-pleasing Son.


Milton.

3. A contrivance for sustaining anything by suspension; as: (a) A kind
of hanging bandage put around the neck, in which a wounded arm or hand
is supported. (b) A loop of rope, or a rope or chain with hooks, for
suspending a barrel, bale, or other heavy object, in hoisting or
lowering. (c) A strap attached to a firearm, for suspending it from the
shoulder. (d) (Naut.) A band of rope or iron for securing a yard to a
mast; -- chiefly in the plural.

Sling cart, a kind of cart used to transport cannon and their
carriages, large stones, machines, etc., the objects transported being
slung, or suspended by a chain attached to the axletree. -- Sling dog,
one of a pair of iron hooks used as part of a sling. See def. 3 (b)
above.

Sling, v. t. [imp. Slung (?), Archaic Slang (&?;); p. p. Slung; p. pr.
& vb. n. Slinging.] [AS. slingan; akin to D. slingeren, G. schlingen,
to wind, to twist, to creep, OHG. slingan to wind, to twist, to move to
and fro, Icel. slyngva, slöngva, to sling, Sw. slunga, Dan. slynge,
Lith. slinkti to creep.] 1. To throw with a sling. "Every one could
sling stones at an hairbreadth, and not miss." Judg. xx. 16.

2. To throw; to hurl; to cast. Addison.

3. To hang so as to swing; as, to sling a pack.

4. (Naut) To pass a rope round, as a cask, gun, etc., preparatory to
attaching a hoisting or lowering tackle.

Sling, n. [Cf. G. schlingen to swallow.] A drink composed of spirit
(usually gin) and water sweetened.

Sling"er (?), n. One who slings, or uses a sling.

Slink (?), v. t. [imp. Slunk (?), Archaic Slank (&?;); p. p. Slunk; p.
pr. & vb. n. Slinking.] [AS. slincan; probably akin to G. schleichen,
E. sleek. See Sleek, a.] 1. To creep away meanly; to steal away; to
sneak. "To slink away and hide." Tale of Beryn.

    Back to the thicket slunk The guilty serpent.


Milton.

    There were some few who slank obliquely from them as they passed.


Landor.

2. To miscarry; -- said of female beasts.

Slink, v. t. To cast prematurely; - - said of female beasts; as, a cow
that slinks her calf.

Slink, a. 1. Produced prematurely; as, a slink calf.

2. Thin; lean. [Scot.]

Slink, n. 1. The young of a beast brought forth prematurely, esp. a
calf brought forth before its time.

2. A thievish fellow; a sneak. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Slink"y (?), a. Thin; lank. [Prov. Eng. & U. S.]

Slip (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slipped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slipping.]
[OE. slippen; akin to LG. & D. slippen, MHG. slipfen (cf. Dan. slippe,
Sw. slippa, Icel. sleppa), and fr. OE. slipen, AS. slpan (in comp.),
akin to G. schleifen to slide, glide, drag, whet, OHG. slfan to slide,
glide, make smooth, Icel. slpa to whet; cf. also AS. sl&?;pan, Goth.
sliupan, OS. slopian, OHG. sliofan, G. schliefen, schl&?;pfen, which
seem to come from a somewhat different root form. Cf. Slope, n.] 1. To
move along the surface of a thing without bounding, rolling, or
stepping; to slide; to glide.

2. To slide; to lose one's footing or one's hold; not to tread firmly;
as, it is necessary to walk carefully lest the foot should slip.

3. To move or fly (out of place); to shoot; -- often with out, off,
etc.; as, a bone may slip out of its place.

4. To depart, withdraw, enter, appear, intrude, or escape as if by
sliding; to go or come in a quiet, furtive manner; as, some errors
slipped into the work.

    Thus one tradesman slips away, To give his partner fairer play.


Prior.

    Thrice the flitting shadow slipped away.


Dryden.

5. To err; to fall into error or fault.

    There is one that slippeth in his speech, but not from his heart.


Ecclus. xix. 16.

To let slip, to loose from the slip or noose, as a hound; to allow to
escape.

    Cry, "Havoc," and let slip the dogs of war.


Shak.

Slip (?), v. t. 1. To cause to move smoothly and quickly; to slide; to
convey gently or secretly.

    He tried to slip a powder into her drink.


Arbuthnot.

2. To omit; to loose by negligence.

    And slip no advantage That my secure you.


B. Jonson.

3. To cut slips from; to cut; to take off; to make a slip or slips of;
as, to slip a piece of cloth or paper.

    The branches also may be slipped and planted.


Mortimer.

4. To let loose in pursuit of game, as a greyhound.

    Lucento slipped me like his greyhound.


Shak.

5. To cause to slip or slide off, or out of place; as, a horse slips
his bridle; a dog slips his collar.

6. To bring forth (young) prematurely; to slink.

To slip a cable. (Naut.) See under Cable. -- To slip off, to take off
quickly; as, to slip off a coat. -- To slip on, to put on in haste or
loosely; as, to slip on a gown or coat.

Slip, n. [AS. slipe, slip.] 1. The act of slipping; as, a slip on the
ice.

2. An unintentional error or fault; a false step.

    This good man's slip mended his pace to martyrdom.


Fuller.

3. A twig separated from the main stock; a cutting; a scion; hence, a
descendant; as, a slip from a vine.

    A native slip to us from foreign seeds.


Shak.

    The girlish slip of a Sicilian bride.


R. Browning.

4. A slender piece; a strip; as, a slip of paper.

    Moonlit slips of silver cloud.


Tennyson.

    A thin slip of a girl, like a new moon Sure to be rounded into
    beauty soon.


Longfellow.

5. A leash or string by which a dog is held; - - so called from its
being made in such a manner as to slip, or become loose, by relaxation
of the hand.

    We stalked over the extensive plains with Killbuck and Lena in the
    slips, in search of deer.


Sir S. Baker.

6. An escape; a secret or unexpected desertion; as, to give one the
slip. Shak.

7. (Print.) A portion of the columns of a newspaper or other work
struck off by itself; a proof from a column of type when set up and in
the galley.

8. Any covering easily slipped on. Specifically: (a) A loose garment
worn by a woman. (b) A child's pinafore. (c) An outside covering or
case; as, a pillow slip. (d) The slip or sheath of a sword, and the
like. [R.]

9. A counterfeit piece of money, being brass covered with silver.
[Obs.] Shak.

10. Matter found in troughs of grindstones after the grinding of edge
tools. [Prov. Eng.] Sir W. Petty.

11. Potter's clay in a very liquid state, used for the decoration of
ceramic ware, and also as a cement for handles and other applied parts.

12. A particular quantity of yarn. [Prov. Eng.]

13. An inclined plane on which a vessel is built, or upon which it is
hauled for repair.

14. An opening or space for vessels to lie in, between wharves or in a
dock; as, Peck slip. [U. S.]

15. A narrow passage between buildings. [Eng.]

16. A long seat or narrow pew in churches, often without a door. [U.
S.]

17. (Mining.) A dislocation of a lead, destroying continuity. Knight.

18. (Engin.) The motion of the center of resistance of the float of a
paddle wheel, or the blade of an oar, through the water horozontally,
or the difference between a vessel's actual speed and the speed which
she would have if the propelling instrument acted upon a solid; also,
the velocity, relatively to still water, of the backward current of
water produced by the propeller.

19. (Zoöl.) A fish, the sole.

20. (Cricket) A fielder stationed on the off side and to the rear of
the batsman. There are usually two of them, called respectively short
slip, and long slip.

To give one the slip, to slip away from one; to elude one. -- Slip
dock. See under Dock. -- Slip link (Mach.), a connecting link so
arranged as to allow some play of the parts, to avoid concussion. --
Slip rope (Naut.), a rope by which a cable is secured preparatory to
slipping. Totten. -- Slip stopper (Naut.), an arrangement for letting
go the anchor suddenly.

Slip"board` (?), n. A board sliding in grooves.

Slip"coat` cheese" (?). A rich variety of new cheese, resembling
butter, but white. Halliwell.

Slipes (?), n. pl. [Cf. Slip, v.] Sledge runners on which a skip is
dragged in a mine.

Slip"knot` (?), n. knot which slips along the rope or line around which
it is made.

Slip"-on` (?), n. A kind of overcoat worn upon the shoulders in the
manner of a cloak. [Scot.]

Slip"page (?), n. The act of slipping; also, the amount of slipping.

Slip"per (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, slips.

2. A kind of light shoe, which may be slipped on with ease, and worn in
undress; a slipshoe.

3. A kind of apron or pinafore for children.

4. A kind of brake or shoe for a wagon wheel.

5. (Mach.) A piece, usually a plate, applied to a sliding piece, to
receive wear and afford a means of adjustment; -- also called shoe, and
gib.

Slipper animalcule (Zoöl.), a ciliated infusorian of the genus
Paramecium. -- Slipper flower.(Bot.) Slipperwort. - - Slipper limpet,
or Slipper shell (Zoöl.), a boat shell.

Slip"per, a. [AS. slipur.] Slippery. [Obs.]

    O! trustless state of earthly things, and slipper hope Of mortal
    men.


Spenser.

Slip"pered (?), a. Wearing slippers. Shak.

Slip"per*i*ly (?), adv. In a slippery manner.

Slip"per*i*ness, n. The quality of being slippery.

Slip"per*ness, n. Slipperiness. [Obs.]

Slip"per*wort` (?), n. (Bot.) See Calceolaria.

Slip"per*y (?), a. [See Slipper, a.] 1. Having the quality opposite to
adhesiveness; allowing or causing anything to slip or move smoothly,
rapidly, and easily upon the surface; smooth; glib; as, oily substances
render things slippery.

2. Not affording firm ground for confidence; as, a slippery promise.

    The slippery tops of human state.


Cowley.

3. Not easily held; liable or apt to slip away.

    The slippery god will try to loose his hold.


Dryden.

4. Liable to slip; not standing firm. Shak.

5. Unstable; changeable; mutable; uncertain; inconstant; fickle. "The
slippery state of kings." Denham.

6. Uncertain in effect. L'Estrange.

7. Wanton; unchaste; loose in morals. Shak.

Slippery elm. (Bot.) (a) An American tree (Ulmus fulva) with a
mucilagenous and slightly aromatic inner bark which is sometimes used
medicinally; also, the inner bark itself. (b) A malvaceous shrub
(Fremontia Californica); -- so called on the Pacific coast.

Slip"pi*ness (?), n. Slipperiness. [R.] "The slippiness of the way."
Sir W. Scott.

Slip"py (?), a. [AS. slipeg.] Slippery.

Slip"shod` (?), a. 1. Wearing shoes or slippers down at the heel.

    The shivering urchin bending as he goes, With slipshod heels.


Cowper.

2. Figuratively: Careless in dress, manners, style, etc.; slovenly;
shuffling; as, slipshod manners; a slipshod or loose style of writing.

    Thy wit shall ne'er go slipshod.


Shak.

Slip"shoe` (?), n. A slipper. Halliwell.

Slip"skin` (?), a. Evasive. [Obs.] Milton.

Slip"slop` (?), n. [A reduplication of slop.] Weak, poor, or flat
liquor; weak, profitless discourse or writing.

Slip"string` (?), n. One who has shaken off restraint; a prodigal.
[Obs.] Cotgrave.

Slip"thrift` (?), n. A spendthrift. [Obs.]

Slish (?), n. [A corruption of slash.] A cut; as, slish and slash.
[Colloq.] Shak.

Slit (?), obs. 3d. pers. sing. pres. of Slide. Chaucer.

Slit (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slit or Slitted (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slitting.] [OE. slitten, fr. sliten, AS. sttan to tear; akin to D.
slijten to wear out, G. schleissen to slit, split, OHG. slzan to split,
tear, wear out, Icel. stta to break, tear, wear out, Sw. slita, Dan.
slide. Cf. Eclat, Slate, n., Slice.] 1. To cut lengthwise; to cut into
long pieces or strips; as, to slit iron bars into nail rods; to slit
leather into straps.

2. To cut or make a long fissure in or upon; as, to slit the ear or the
nose.

3. To cut; to sever; to divide. [Obs.]

    And slits the thin-spun life.


Milton.

Slit, n. [AS. slite.] A long cut; a narrow opening; as, a slit in the
ear.

Gill slit. (Anat.) See Gill opening, under Gill.

Slith"er (?), v. i. [Cf. G. schlittern, LG. schliddern. See Slide.] To
slide; to glide. [Prov. Eng.]

Slit"-shell" (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of Pleurotomaria, a genus of
beautiful, pearly, spiral gastropod shells having a deep slit in the
outer lip. Many fossil species are known, and a few living ones are
found in deep water in tropical seas.

Slit"ter (?), n. One who, or that which, slits.

Slit"ting (?), a. & n. from Slit.

Slitting file. See Illust. (i) of File. -- Slitting mill. (a) A mill
where iron bars or plates are slit into narrow strips, as nail rods,
and the like. (b) A machine used by lapidaries for slicing stones,
usually by means of a revolving disk, called a slicer, supplied with
diamond powder. -- Slitting roller, one of a pair of rollers furnished
with ribs entering between similar ribs in the other roller, and
cutting like shears, -- used in slitting metals.

Slive (?), v. i. [Cf. Slip.] To sneak. [Prov. Eng.]

Slive, v. t. [OE. sliven to split, cleave, AS. slfan.] To cut; to
split; to separate. [Obs.] Holland.

Sliv"er (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slivered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slivering.] [See Slive, v. t.] To cut or divide into long, thin pieces,
or into very small pieces; to cut or rend lengthwise; to slit; as, to
sliver wood. Shak.

    They 'll sliver thee like a turnip.


Sir W. Scott.

Sliv"er, n. 1. A long piece cut ot rent off; a sharp, slender fragment;
a splinter.

2. A strand, or slender roll, of cotton or other fiber in a loose,
untwisted state, produced by a carding machine and ready for the roving
or slubbing which preceeds spinning.

3. pl. Bait made of pieces of small fish. Cf. Kibblings. [Local, U.S.]
Bartlett.

Sloak"an (?), n. (Bot.) A species of seaweed. [Spelled also slowcawn.]
See 3d Laver.

Sloam (?), n. (Mining) A layer of earth between coal seams.

Sloat (?), n. [See Slot a bar.] A narrow piece of timber which holds
together large pieces; a slat; as, the sloats of a cart.

Slob"ber (?), v. t. & i. See Slabber.

Slob"ber, n. 1. See Slabber.

2. (Zoöl.) A jellyfish. [Prov. Eng.]

3. pl. (Vet.) Salivation.

Slob"ber*er (?), n. 1. One who slobbers.

2. A slovenly farmer; a jobbing tailor. [Prov. Eng.]

Slob"ber*y (?), a. Wet; sloppy, as land. Shak.

{ Slock (?), Slock"en (?), } v. t. To quench; to allay; to slake. See
Slake. [Obs. or Scot.]

Slock"ing, a. & n. from Slock.

Slocking stone, a rich piece of ore displayed in order to tempt persons
to embark in a mining enterprise.

Sloe (?), n. [OE. slo, AS. sl; akin to D. slee, G. schlehe, OHG. sl$ha,
Dan. slaaen, Sw. sl&?;n, perhaps originally, that which blunts the
teeth, or sets them on edge (cf. Slow); cf. Lith. sliwa a plum, Russ.
sliva.] (Bot.) A small, bitter, wild European plum, the fruit of the
blackthorn (Prunus spinosa); also, the tree itself.

Slo"gan (?), n. [Gael. sluagh- ghairm, i.e., an army cry; sluagh army +
gairm a call, calling.] The war cry, or gathering word, of a Highland
clan in Scotland; hence, any rallying cry. Sir W. Scott.

<! p. 1356 !>

Slog"gy (?), a. Sluggish. [Obs.]

    Somnolence that is sloggy slumbering


Chaucer.

Sloke (?), n. (Bot.) See Sloakan.

{ Sloo (?), or Slue (?) }, n. A slough; a run or wet place. See 2d
Slough, 2.

Sloom (?), n. Slumber. [Prov. Eng.]

Sloom"y (?), a. Sluggish; slow. [Prov. Eng.]

Sloop (?), n.[D. sloep, of uncertain origin. Cf. Shallop.] (Naut.) A
vessel having one mast and fore-and-aft rig, consisting of a
boom-and-gaff mainsail, jibs, staysail, and gaff topsail. The typical
sloop has a fixed bowsprit, topmast, and standing rigging, while those
of a cutter are capable of being readily shifted. The sloop usually
carries a centerboard, and depends for stability upon breadth of beam
rather than depth of keel. The two types have rapidly approximated
since 1880. One radical distinction is that a slop may carry a
centerboard. See Cutter, and Illustration in Appendix.

Sloop of war, formerly, a vessel of war rigged either as a ship, brig,
or schooner, and mounting from ten to thirty-two guns; now, any war
vessel larger than a gunboat, and carrying guns on one deck only.

Slop (?), n. [OE. sloppe a pool; akin to As. sloppe, slyppe, the sloppy
droppings of a cow; cf. AS. sl&?;pan to slip, and E. slip, v.i. Cf.
Cowslip.] 1. Water or other liquid carelessly spilled or thrown aboyt,
as upon a table or a floor; a puddle; a soiled spot.

2. Mean and weak drink or liquid food; -- usually in the plural.

3. pl. Dirty water; water in which anything has been washed or rinsed;
water from wash-bowls, etc.

Slop basin, or Slop bowl, a basin or bowl for holding slops, especially
for receiving the rinsings of tea or coffee cups at the table. -- Slop
molding (Brickmaking), a process of manufacture in which the brick is
carried to the drying ground in a wet mold instead of on a pallet.

Slop, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slopped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slopping.] 1. To
cause to overflow, as a liquid, by the motion of the vessel containing
it; to spill.

2. To spill liquid upon; to soil with a liquid spilled.

Slop, v. i. To overflow or be spilled as a liquid, by the motion of the
vessel containing it; -- often with over.

Slop, n. [AS. slop a frock or over-garment, fr. sl&?;pan to slip, to
slide; akin to Icel sloppr a thin garment; cf. OHG. slouf a garment.
Cf. Slip, v. i.] 1. Any kind of outer garment made of linen or cotton,
as a night dress, or a smock frock. [Obs.] Halliwell.

2. A loose lower garment; loose breeches; chiefly used in the plural.
"A pair of slops." Sir P. Sidney.

    There's a French salutation to your French slop.


Shak.

3. pl. Ready-made clothes; also, among seamen, clothing, bedding, and
other furnishings.

Slope (?), n. [Formed (like abode fr. abide) from OE. slipen. See Slip,
v. i.] 1. An oblique direction; a line or direction including from a
horizontal line or direction; also, sometimes, an inclination, as of
one line or surface to another.

2. Any ground whose surface forms an angle with the plane of the
horizon.

    buildings the summit and slope of a hill.


Macaulay.

    Under the slopes of Pisgah.


Deut. iv. 49. (Rev. Ver.).

A slope, considered as descending, is a declivity; considered as
ascending, an acclivity.

Slope of a plane (Geom.), the direction of the plane; as, parallel
planes have the same slope.

Slope, a. Sloping. "Down the slope hills." Milton.

    A bank not steep, but gently slope.


Bacon.

Slope, adv. In a sloping manner. [Obs.] Milton.

Slope, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sloped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sloping.] To
form with a slope; to give an oblique or slanting direction to; to
direct obliquely; to incline; to slant; as, to slope the ground in a
garden; to slope a piece of cloth in cutting a garment.

Slope, v. i. 1. To take an oblique direction; to be at an angle with
the plane of the horizon; to incline; as, the ground slopes.

2. To depart; to disappear suddenly. [Slang]

Slope"ness, n. State of being slope. Sir H. Wotton.

Slope"wise` (?), adv. Obliquely. [Obs.] Carew.

Slop"ing, a. Inclining or inclined from the plane of the horizon, or
from a horizontal or other right line; oblique; declivous; slanting. --
Slop"ing*ly, adv.

    The sloping land recedes into the clouds.


Cowper.

Slop"pi*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sloppy; muddiness.

Slop"py (?), a. [Compar. Sloppier (?); superl. Sloppiest.] [From Slop.]
Wet, so as to spatter easily; wet, as with something slopped over;
muddy; plashy; as, a sloppy place, walk, road.

Slop"sell`er (?), n. One who sells slops, or ready-made clothes. See
4th Slop, 3.

Slop"shop` (?), n. A shop where slops. or ready-made clothes, are sold.

Slop"work` (?), n. The manufacture of slops, or cheap ready-made
clothing; also, such clothing; hence, hasty, slovenly work of any kind.

    No slopwork ever dropped from his [Carlyle's] pen.


Froude.

Slop"y (?), a. Sloping; inclined.

{ Slosh (?), Slosh"y (?) }. See Slush, Slushy.

Slot (?), n. [LG. & D. slot a lock, from a verb meaning to close., to
shut, D. sluiten; akin to G. schliessen, OHG. sliozan, OFries. sl&?;ta,
and probably to L. claudere. Cf. Close, Sluice.] 1. A broad, flat,
wooden bar; a slat or sloat.

2. A bolt or bar for fastening a door. [Prov. Eng.]

3. A narrow depression, perforation, or aperture; esp., one for the
reception of a piece fitting or sliding in it.

Slot (?), v. t. [See Slot a bar.] To shut with violence; to slam; as,
to slot a door. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Slot, n. [Cf. Icel. sl&?;&?;, and E. sleuth.] The track of a deer;
hence, a track of any kind. Milton.

    As a bloodhound follows the slot of a hurt deer.


Sir W. Scott.

Sloth (?), n. [OE. slouthe, sleuthe, AS. sl&?;w&?;, fr. slw slow. See
Slow.] 1. Slowness; tardiness.

    These cardinals trifle with me; I abhor This dilatory sloth and
    tricks of Rome.


Shak.

2. Disinclination to action or labor; sluggishness; laziness; idleness.

    [They] change their course to pleasure, ease, and sloth.


Milton.

    Sloth, like rust, consumes faster than labor wears.


Franklin.

3. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of arboreal edentates
constituting the family Bradypodidæ, and the suborder Tardigrada. They
have long exserted limbs and long prehensile claws. Both jaws are
furnished with teeth (see Illust. of Edentata), and the ears and tail
are rudimentary. They inhabit South and Central America and Mexico.

The three-toed sloths belong to the genera Bradypus and Arctopithecus,
of which several species have been described. They have three toes on
each foot. The best-known species are collared sloth (Bradypus
tridactylus), and the ai (Arctopitheus ai). The two-toed sloths,
consisting the genus Cholopus, have two toes on each fore foot and
three on each hind foot. The best-known is the unau (Cholopus
didactylus) of South America. See Unau. Another species (C. Hoffmanni)
inhabits Central America. Various large extinct terrestrial edentates,
such as Megatherium and Mylodon, are often called sloths.

Australian, or Native sloth (Zoöl.), the koala. -- Sloth animalcule
(Zoöl.), a tardigrade. -- Sloth bear (Zoöl.), a black or brown
long-haired bear (Melursus ursinus, or labiatus), native of India and
Ceylon; -- called also aswail, labiated bear, and jungle bear. It is
easily tamed and can be taught many tricks. -- Sloth monkey (Zoöl.), a
loris.

Sloth, v. i. To be idle. [Obs.] Gower.

Sloth"ful (?), a. Addicted to sloth; inactive; sluggish; lazy;
indolent; idle.

    He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a
    great waster.


Prov. xviii. 9.

-- Sloth"ful*ly, adv. -- Sloth"ful*ness, n.

Sloth"hound` (?), n. [See Slot a track, and cf. Sleuthhound.] (Zoöl.)
See Sleuthhound.

Slot"ted (?), a. Having a slot.

Slot"ting (?), n. The act or process of making slots, or mortises.

Slouch (?), n. [Cf. Icel. sl&?;kra slouching felloew, and E. slack,
slug, a lazy fellow.] 1. A hanging down of the head; a drooping
attitude; a limp appearance; an ungainly, clownish gait; a sidewise
depression or hanging down, as of a hat brim.

2. An awkward, heavy, clownish fellow. [Colloq.]

Slouth hat, a soft, limp hat of unstiffened cloth or felt.

Slouch, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slouched (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slouching.]
1. To droop, as the head.

2. To walk in a clumsy, lazy manner. [Colloq.]

Slouch, v. t. To cause to hang down; to depress at the side; as, to
slouth the hat.

Slouch"ing, a. Hanging down at the side; limp; drooping; without
firmness or shapeliness; moving in an ungainly manner.

Slouch"y (?), a. Slouching. [Colloq.]

Slough (?), a. Slow. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Slough (?), n. [OE. slogh, slough, AS. slh a hollow place; cf. MHG.
slch an abyss, gullet, G. schlucken to swallow; also Gael. & Ir. sloc a
pit, pool. ditch, Ir. slug to swallow. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; to hiccough,
to sob.] 1. A place of deep mud or mire; a hole full of mire. Chaucer.

    He's here stuck in a slough.


Milton.

2. [Pronounced sl.] A wet place; a swale; a side channel or inlet from
a river. [In this sense local or provincial; also spelt sloo, and
slue.]

Slough grass (Bot.), a name in the Mississippi valley for grasses of
the genus Muhlenbergia; -- called also drop seed, and nimble Will.

Slough, obs. imp. of Slee, to slay. Slew. Chaucer.

Slough (?), n. [OE. slugh, slouh; cf. MHG. sl&?;ch the skin of a
serpent, G. schlauch a skin, a leather bag or bottle.] 1. The skin,
commonly the cast-off skin, of a serpent or of some similar animal.

2. (Med.) The dead mass separating from a foul sore; the dead part
which separates from the living tissue in mortification.

Slough, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sloughed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sloughing.]
(Med.) To form a slough; to separate in the form of dead matter from
the living tissues; -- often used with off, or away; as, a sloughing
ulcer; the dead tissues slough off slowly.

Slough, v. t. To cast off; to discard as refuse.

    New tint the plumage of the birds, And slough decay from grazing
    herds.


Emerson.

Slough"ing (?), n. (Zoöl.) The act of casting off the skin or shell, as
do insects and crustaceans; ecdysis.

Slough"y (?), a. Full of sloughs, miry.

Slough"y (?), a. Resembling, or of the nature of, a slough, or the dead
matter which separates from living flesh.

Slov"en (?), n. [D. slaf careless, negligent, a sloven; akin to LG.
sluf slovenly.] A man or boy habitually negligent of neathess and
order; -- the correlative term to slattern, or slut. Pope.

    He became a confirmed sloven.


Macaulay.

Slov"en*li*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being slovenly.

Slov"en*ly, a. 1. Having the habits of a sloven; negligent of neatness
and order, especially in dress.

    A slovenly, lazy fellow, lolling at his ease.


L'Estrange.

2. Characteristic of a sloven; lacking neatness and order; evincing
negligence; as, slovenly dress.

Slov"en*ly, adv. a slovenly manner.

Slov"en*ness, n. Slovenliness. [Obs.] Fuller.

Slov"en*ry (?), n. Slovenliness. [Obs.] Shak.

Slow (sl), obs. imp. of Slee, to slay. Slew. Chaucer.

Slow (sl), a. [Compar. Slower (?); superl. Slowest.] [OE. slow, slaw,
AS. slw; akin to OS. slu blunt, dull, D. sleeuw, slee, sour, OHG. slo
blunt, dull, Icel. slr, slær, Dan. slöv, Sw. slö. Cf. Sloe, and Sloth.]
1. Moving a short space in a relatively long time; not swift; not quick
in motion; not rapid; moderate; deliberate; as, a slow stream; a slow
motion.

2. Not happening in a short time; gradual; late.

    These changes in the heavens, though slow, produced Like change on
    sea and land, sidereal blast.


Milton.

3. Not ready; not prompt or quick; dilatory; sluggish; as, slow of
speech, and slow of tongue.

    Fixed on defense, the Trojans are not slow To guard their shore
    from an expected foe.


Dryden.

4. Not hasty; not precipitate; acting with deliberation; tardy;
inactive.

    He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding.


Prov. xiv. 29.

5. Behind in time; indicating a time earlier than the true time; as,
the clock or watch is slow.

6. Not advancing or improving rapidly; as, the slow growth of arts and
sciences.

7. Heavy in wit; not alert, prompt, or spirited; wearisome; dull.
[Colloq.] Dickens. Thackeray.

Slow is often used in the formation of compounds for the most part
self-explaining; as, slow-gaited, slow- paced, slow-sighted,
slow-winged, and the like.

Slow coach, a slow person. See def.7, above. [Colloq.] -- Slow lemur,
or Slow loris (Zoöl.), an East Indian nocturnal lemurine animal
(Nycticebus tardigradus) about the size of a small cat; -- so called
from its slow and deliberate movements. It has very large round eyes
and is without a tail. Called also bashful Billy. -- Slow match. See
under Match.

Syn. -- Dilatory; late; lingering; tardy; sluggish; dull; inactive. --
Slow, Tardy, Dilatory. Slow is the wider term, denoting either a want
of rapid motion or inertness of intellect. Dilatory signifies a
proneness to defer, a habit of delaying the performance of what we know
must be done. Tardy denotes the habit of being behind hand; as, tardy
in making up one's acounts.

Slow, adv. Slowly.

    Let him have time to mark how slow time goes In time of sorrow.


Shak.

Slow, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slowed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slowing.] To
render slow; to slacken the speed of; to retard; to delay; as, to slow
a steamer. Shak.

Slow, v. i. To go slower; -- often with up; as, the train slowed up
before crossing the bridge.

Slow, n. A moth. [Obs.] Rom. of R.

Slow"back` (?), n. A lubber; an idle fellow; a loiterer. [Old Slang]
Dr. Favour.

Slowh (?), obs. imp. of Slee,to slay. Chaucer.

Slow"hound` (?), n. A sleuthhound. [R.]

Slow"ly, adv. In a slow manner; moderately; not rapidly; not early; not
rashly; not readly; tardly.

Slow"ness, n. The quality or state of being slow.

Slows (?), n. (Med.) Milk sickness.

Slow"-wit`ted (?), a. Dull of apprehension; not possessing quick
intelligence.

Slow"worm` (?), n. [AS. slwyrm; the first part is probably akin to
sleán to strike, the reptile being supposed to be very poisonous. See
Slay, v. t., and Worm.] (Zoöl.) A lecertilian reptile; the blindworm.

Slub (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] A roll of wool slightly twisted; a
rove; -- called also slubbing.

Slub, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slubbed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slubbing.] To
draw out and twist slightly; -- said of slivers of wool.

Slub"ber (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slubbered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slubbering.] [Cf. Dan. slubbreto swallow, to sup up, D. slobberen to
lap, to slabber. Cf. Slabber.] 1. To do lazily, imperfectly, or
coarsely.

    Slubber not business for my sake.


Shak.

2. To daub; to stain; to cover carelessly.

    There is no art that hath more . . . slubbered with aphorisming
    pedantry than the art of policy.


Milton.

Slub"ber, n. A slubbing machine.

Slub"ber*de*gul`lion (?), n. [Slubber + Prov. E. gullion a wretch.] A
mean, dirty wretch. [Low]

Slub"ber*ing*ly, adv. In a slovenly, or hurried and imperfect, manner.
[Low] Drayton.

Slub"bing (?), a. & n. from Slub.

Slubbing billy, or Slubbing machine, the machine by which slubs are
formed.

Sludge (?), n. [CF. Slush.] 1. Mud; mire; soft mud; slush. Mortimer.
Tennyson.

2. Small floating pieces of ice, or masses of saturated snow. Kane.

3. (Mining) See Slime, 4.

Sludge hole, the hand-hole, or manhole, in a steam boiler, by means of
which sediment can be removed.

<! p. 1357 !>

Slud"ger (slj"r), n. A bucket for removing mud from a bored hole; a
sand pump.

Slud"y (?), a. Miry; slushy.

Slue (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slued (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Sluing
(&?;).] [Prov. E. slew to turn round, Scot. to lean or incline to a
side; cf. Icel. sn&?;a to turn, bend.] [Written also slew.] 1. (Naut.)
To turn about a fixed point, usually the center or axis, as a spar or
piece of timber; to turn; -- used also of any heavy body.

2. In general, to turn about; to twist; -- often used reflexively and
followed by round. [Colloq.]

    They laughed, and slued themselves round.


Dickens.

Slue, v. i. To turn about; to turn from the course; to slip or slide
and turn from an expected or desired course; -- often followed by
round.

Slue, n. See Sloough, 2. [Local]

Slug (?), n. [OE. slugge slothful, sluggen to be slothful; cf. LG.
slukk low- spirited, sad, E. slack, slouch, D. slak, slek, a snail.] 1.
A drone; a slow, lazy fellow; a sluggard. Shak.

2. A hindrance; an obstruction. [Obs.] Bacon.

3. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of terrestrial pulmonate
mollusks belonging to Limax and several related genera, in which the
shell is either small and concealed in the mantle, or altogether
wanting. They are closely allied to the land snails.

4. (Zoöl.) Any smooth, soft larva of a sawfly or moth which creeps like
a mollusk; as, the pear slug; rose slug.

5. A ship that sails slowly. [Obs.] Halliwell.

    His rendezvous for his fleet, and for all slugs to come to, should
    be between Calais and Dover.


Pepys.

6. [Perhaps a different word.] An irregularly shaped piece of metal,
used as a missile for a gun.

7. (Print.) A thick strip of metal less than type high, and as long as
the width of a column or a page, -- used in spacing out pages and to
separate display lines, etc.

Sea slug. (Zoöl.) (a) Any nudibranch mollusk. (b) A holothurian. --
Slug caterpillar. Same as Slugworm.

Slug, v. i. To move slowly; to lie idle. [Obs.]

    To slug in sloth and sensual delight.


Spenser.

Slug, v. t. To make sluggish. [Obs.] Milton.

Slug, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slugged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slugging (?).]
1. To load with a slug or slugs; as, to slug a gun.

2. To strike heavily. [Cant or Slang]

Slug, v. i. To become reduced in diameter, or changed in shape, by
passing from a larger to a smaller part of the bore of the barrel; --
said of a bullet when fired from a gun, pistol, or other firearm.

Slug"a*bed` (?), n. One who indulges in lying abed; a sluggard. [R.]
"Fie, you slugabed!" Shak.

Slug"gard (?), n. [Slug + - ard.] A person habitually lazy, idle, and
inactive; a drone.

    Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise.


Prov. vi. 6.

Slug"gard, a. Sluggish; lazy. Dryden.

Slug"gard*ize (?), v. t. To make lazy. [R.] Shak.

Slug"gard*y (?), n. [OE. sloggardye.] The state of being a sluggard;
sluggishness; sloth. Gower.

    Idleness is rotten sluggardy.


Chaucer.

Slug"ger (?), n. One who strikes heavy blows; hence, a boxer; a prize
fighter. [Cant or Slang]

Slug"gish (?), a. 1. Habitually idle and lazy; slothful; dull;
inactive; as, a sluggish man.

2. Slow; having little motion; as, a sluggish stream.

3. Having no power to move one's self or itself; inert.

    Matter, being impotent, sluggish, and inactive, hath no power to
    stir or move itself.


Woodward.

    And the sluggish land slumbers in utter neglect.


Longfellow.

4. Characteristic of a sluggard; dull; stupid; tame; simple. [R.] "So
sluggish a conceit." Milton.

Syn. -- Inert; idle; lazy; slothful; indolent; dronish; slow; dull;
drowsy; inactive. See Inert.

-- Slug"gish*ly, adv. -- Slug"gish*ness, n.

Slug"gy (?), a. Sluggish. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Slug"-horn` (?), a. An erroneous form of the Scotch word slughorne, or
sloggorne, meaning slogan.

Slugs (?), n. pl. (Mining) Half-roasted ore.

Slug"worm` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any caterpillar which has the general
appearance of a slug, as do those of certain moths belonging to
Limacodes and allied genera, and those of certain sawflies.

Sluice (?), n. [OF. escluse, F. écluse, LL. exclusa, sclusa, from L.
excludere, exclusum, to shut out: cf. D. sluis sluice, from the Old
French. See Exclude.] 1. An artifical passage for water, fitted with a
valve or gate, as in a mill stream, for stopping or regulating the
flow; also, a water gate or flood gate.

2. Hence, an opening or channel through which anything flows; a source
of supply.

    Each sluice of affluent fortune opened soon.


Harte.

    This home familiarity . . . opens the sluices of sensibility.


I. Taylor.

3. The stream flowing through a flood gate.

4. (Mining) A long box or trough through which water flows, -- used for
washing auriferous earth.

Sluice gate, the sliding gate of a sluice.

Sluice, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sluiced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sluicing (?).]
1. To emit by, or as by, flood gates. [R.] Milton.

2. To wet copiously, as by opening a sluice; as, to sluice meadows.
Howitt.

    He dried his neck and face, which he had been sluicing with cold
    water.


De Quincey.

3. To wash with, or in, a stream of water running through a sluice; as,
to sluice eart or gold dust in mining.

Sluice"way` (?), n. An artificial channel into which water is let by a
sluice; specifically, a trough constructed over the bed of a stream, so
that logs, lumber, or rubbish can be floated down to some convenient
place of delivery.

Slui`cy (?), a. Falling copiously or in streams, as from a sluice.

    And oft whole sheets descend of sluicy rain.


Dryden.

Slum (?), n. [CF. Slump, n.] 1. A foul back street of a city,
especially one filled with a poor, dirty, degraded, and often vicious
population; any low neighborhood or dark retreat; -- usually in the
plural; as, Westminster slums are haunts for theives. Dickens.

2. pl. (Mining) Same as Slimes.

Slum"ber (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slumbered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Slumbering.] [OE. slombren, slumberen, slumeren, AS. slumerian, fr.
sluma slumber; akin to D. sluimeren to slumber, MHG. slummern, slumen,
G. schlummern, Dan. slumre, Sw. slumra, Goth. slawan to be silent.] 1.
To sleep; especially, to sleep lightly; to doze. Piers Plowman.

    He that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.


Ps. cxxi. 4.

2. To be in a state of negligence, sloth, supineness, or inactivity.
"Why slumbers Pope?" Young.

Slum"ber, v. t. 1. To lay to sleep. [R.] Wotton.

2. To stun; to stupefy. [Obs.] Spenser.

Slum"ber, n. Sleep; especially, light sleep; sleep that is not deep or
sound; repose.

    He at last fell into a slumber, and thence into a fast sleep, which
    detained him in that place until it was almost night.


Bunyan.

    Fast asleep? It is no matter; Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber.


Shak.

    Rest to my soul, and slumber to my eyes.


Dryden.

Slum"ber*er (?), n. One who slumbers; a sleeper.

Slum"ber*ing*ly, adv. In a slumbering manner.

Slum"ber*less, a. Without slumber; sleepless.

Slum"ber*ous (?), a. 1. Inviting slumber; soporiferous. "Pensive in the
slumberous shade." Pope.

2. Being in the repose of slumber; sleepy; drowsy.

    His quiet and almost slumberous countenance.


Hawthorne.

Slum"ber*y (?), a. Sleepy. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Slum"brous (?), a. Slumberous. Keats.

Slum"ming, vb. n. Visiting slums.

Slump (?), n. [Cf. D. slomp a mass, heap, Dan. slump a quantity, and E.
slump, v.t.] The gross amount; the mass; the lump. [Scot.]

Slump, v. t. [Cf. Lump; also Sw. slumpa to bargain for the lump.] To
lump; to throw into a mess.

    These different groups . . . are exclusively slumped together under
    that sense.


Sir W. Hamilton.

Slump, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Slumped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slumping.]
[Scot. slump a dull noise produced by something falling into a hole, a
marsh, a swamp.] To fall or sink suddenly through or in, when walking
on a surface, as on thawing snow or ice, partly frozen ground, a bog,
etc., not strong enough to bear the person.

    The latter walk on a bottomless quag, into which unawares they may
    slump.


Barrow.

Slump, n. 1. A boggy place. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

2. The noise made by anything falling into a hole, or into a soft, miry
place. [Scot.]

Slump"y (?), a. Easily broken through; boggy; marshy; swampy. [Prov.
Eng. & Colloq. U.S.] Bartlett.

Slung (?), imp. & p. p. of Sling.

Slung shot, a metal ball of small size, with a string attached, used by
ruffians for striking.

Slunk (?), imp. & p. p. of Slink.

Slur (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slurred (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slurring
(?).] [Cf. OE. sloor mud, clay, Icel. sl&?;ra, slo&?;ra, to trail or
drag one's self along, D. sleuren, sloren, to train, to drag, to do
negligently and slovenly, D. sloor, sloerie, a sluttish girl.] 1. To
soil; to sully; to contaminate; to disgrace. Cudworth.

2. To disparage; to traduce. Tennyson.

3. To cover over; to disguise; to conceal; to pass over lightly or with
little notice.

    With periods, points, and tropes, he slurs his crimes.


Dryden.

4. To cheat, as by sliding a die; to trick. [R.]

    To slur men of what they fought for.


Hudibras.

5. To pronounce indistinctly; as, to slur syllables.

6. (Mus.) To sing or perform in a smooth, gliding style; to connect
smoothly in performing, as several notes or tones. Busby.

7. (Print.) To blur or double, as an impression from type; to mackle.

Slur, n. 1. A mark or stain; hence, a slight reproach or disgrace; a
stigma; a reproachful intimation; an innuendo. "Gaining to his name a
lasting slur." South.

2. A trick played upon a person; an imposition. [R.]

3. (Mus.) A mark, thus [ or ], connecting notes that are to be sung to
the same syllable, or made in one continued breath of a wind
instrument, or with one stroke of a bow; a tie; a sign of legato.

4. In knitting machines, a contrivance for depressing the sinkers
successively by passing over them.

Slurred (?), a. (Mus.) Marked with a slur; performed in a smooth,
gliding style, like notes marked with a slur.

Slush (?), n. [Cf. Sw. slaska to paddle in water, slask wet, filth.]
[Written also slosh.] 1. Soft mud.

2. A mixture of snow and water; half-melted snow.

3. A soft mixture of grease and other materials, used for lubrication.

4. The refuse grease and fat collected in cooking, especially on
shipboard.

5. (Mach.) A mixture of white lead and lime, with which the bright
parts of machines, such as the connecting rods of steamboats, are
painted to be preserved from oxidation.

Slush (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Slushed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Slushing.]
1. To smear with slush or grease; as, to slush a mast.

2. To paint with a mixture of white lead and lime.

Slush"y (?), a. Abounding in slush; characterized by soft mud or
half-melted snow; as, the streets are slushy; the snow is slushy. "A
dark, drizzling, slushy day." Blackw. Mag.

Slut (?), n. [OE. slutte; cf. OD. slodde a slut, Icel. slöttr a heavy,
loglike fellow, slota to droop.] 1. An untidy woman; a slattern.

    Sluts are good enough to make a sloven's porridge.


Old Proverb.

2. A servant girl; a drudge. [Obs.]

    Our little girl Susan is a most admirable slut, and pleases us
    mightly, doing more service than both the others.


Pepys.

3. A female dog; a bitch.

Slutch (?), n. [CF. Sludge.] Slush. [Prov. Eng.]

Slutch"y (?), a. Slushy. [Prov. Eng.] Pennant.

Sluth"hound` (?), n. Sleuthhound.

Slut"ter*y (?), n. The qualities and practices of a slut; sluttishness;
slatternlines. Drayton.

Slut"tish (?), a. Like a slut; untidy; indecently negligent of
cleanliness; disorderly; as, a sluttish woman.

    Why is thy lord so slutish, I thee pray.


Chaucer.

    An air of liberal, though sluttish, plenty, indicated the wealthy
    farmer.


Sir W. Scott.

-- Slut"tish*ly, adv. -- Slut"tish*ness, n.

Sly (?), a. [Compar. Slier (?) or Slyer; superl. Sliest or Slyest.]
[OE. sli, slegh, sleih, Icel sl&?;gr, for sl&?;gr; akin to Sw. slug,
Dan. slu, LG. slou, G. schlau; probably to E. slay, v.t.; cf. G.
verschlagen sly. See Slay, v. t., and cf. Sleight.] 1. Dexterous in
performing an action, so as to escape notice; nimble; skillful;
cautious; shrewd; knowing; -- in a good sense.

    Be ye sly as serpents, and simple as doves.


Wyclif (Matt. x. 16).

    Whom graver age And long experience hath made wise and sly.


Fairfax.

2. Artfully cunning; secretly mischievous; wily.

    For my sly wiles and subtle craftiness, The litle of the kingdom I
    possess.


Spenser.

3. Done with, and marked by, artful and dexterous secrecy; subtle; as,
a sly trick.

    Envy works in a sly and imperceptible manner.


I. Watts.

4. Light or delicate; slight; thin. [Obs.]

By the sly, or On the sly, in a sly or secret manner. [Colloq.] "Gazed
on Hetty's charms by the sly." G. Eliot. -- Sly goose (Zoöl.), the
common sheldrake; -- so named from its craftiness.

Syn. -- Cunning; crafty; subtile; wily. See Cunning.

Sly, adv. Slyly. [Obs. or Poetic] Spenser.

Sly"boots` (?), n. A humerous appellation for a sly, cunning, or
waggish person.

    Slyboots was cursedly cunning to hide 'em.


Goldsmith.

Sly"ly, adv. In a sly manner; shrewdly; craftily.

    Honestly and slyly he it spent.


Chaucer.

Sly"ness, n. The quality or state of being sly.

Slype (?), n. [Cf. D. sluipen to sneak.] (Arch.) A narrow passage
between two buildings, as between the transept and chapter house of a
monastery. [Eng.]

Smack (?), n. [D. smak; akin to LG. smack, smak, Dan. smakke, G.
schmacke, F. semaque.] (Naut.) A small sailing vessel, commonly rigged
as a sloop, used chiefly in the coasting and fishing trade.

Smack, n. [OE. smak, AS. ssm&?;c taste, savor; akin to D. smaak, G.
geschmack, OHG. smac; cf. Lith. smagus pleasant. Cf. Smack, v. i.] 1.
Taste or flavor, esp. a slight taste or flavor; savor; tincture; as, a
smack of bitter in the medicine. Also used figuratively.

    So quickly they have taken a smack in covetousness.


Robynson (More's Utopia).

    They felt the smack of this world.


Latimer.

2. A small quantity; a taste. Dryden.

3. A loud kiss; a buss. "A clamorous smack." Shak.

4. A quick, sharp noise, as of the lips when suddenly separated, or of
a whip.

5. A quick, smart blow; a slap. Johnson.

Smack, adv. As if with a smack or slap. [Colloq.]

Smack, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Smacked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Smacking.] [OE.
smaken to taste, have a taste, -- from the noun; cf. AS. smecan taste;
akin to D. smaken, G. schmecken, OHG. smechen to taste, smach&?;n to
have a taste (and, derived from the same source, G. schmatzen to smack
the lips, to kiss with a sharp noise, MHG. smatzen, smackzeen), Icel
smakka to taste, Sw. smaka, Dan. smage. See 2d Smack, n.] 1. To have a
smack; to be tinctured with any particular taste.

2. To have or exhibit indications of the presence of any character or
quality.

    All sects, all ages, smack of this vice.


Shak.

3. To kiss with a close compression of the lips, so as to make a sound
when they separate; to kiss with a sharp noise; to buss.

4. To make a noise by the separation of the lips after tasting
anything.

Smack, v. t. 1. To kiss with a sharp noise; to buss.

2. To open, as the lips, with an inarticulate sound made by a quick
compression and separation of the parts of the mouth; to make a noise
with, as the lips, by separating them in the act of kissing or after
tasting.

    Drinking off the cup, and smacking his lips with an air of
    ineffable relish.


Sir W. Scott.

3. To make a sharp noise by striking; to crack; as, to smack a whip.
"She smacks the silken thong." Young.

Smack"ing, n. A sharp, quick noise; a smack.

    Like the faint smacking of an after kiss.


Dryden.

<! p. 1358 !>

Smack"ing (?), a. Making a sharp, brisk sound; hence, brisk; as, a
smacking breeze.

Small (sml), a. [Compar. Smaller (?); superl. Smallest.] [OE. small,
AS. smæl; akin to D. smal narrow, OS. & OHG. smal small, G. schmal
narrow, Dan. & Sw. smal, Goth. smals small, Icel. smali smal cattle,
sheep, or goats; cf. Gr. mh^lon a sheep or goat.] 1. Having little
size, compared with other things of the same kind; little in quantity
or degree; diminutive; not large or extended in dimension; not great;
not much; inconsiderable; as, a small man; a small river.

    To compare Great things with small.


Milton.

2. Being of slight consequence; feeble in influence or importance;
unimportant; trivial; insignificant; as, a small fault; a small
business.

3. Envincing little worth or ability; not large-minded; -- sometimes,
in reproach, paltry; mean.

    A true delineation of the smallest man is capable of interesting
    the greatest man.


Carlyle.

4. Not prolonged in duration; not extended in time; short; as, after a
small space. Shak.

5. Weak; slender; fine; gentle; soft; not loud. "A still, small voice."
1 Kings xix. 12.

Great and small,of all ranks or degrees; -- used especially of persons.
"His quests, great and small." Chaucer. -- Small arms, muskets, rifles,
pistols, etc., in distinction from cannon. - - Small beer. See under
Beer. -- Small coal. (a) Little coals of wood formerly used to light
fires. Gay. (b) Coal about the size of a hazelnut, separated from the
coarser parts by screening. -- Small craft (Naut.), a vessel, or
vessels in general, of a small size. -- Small fruits. See under Fruit.
-- Small hand, a certain size of paper. See under Paper. -- Small
hours. See under Hour. -- Small letter. (Print.), a lower-case letter.
See Lower-case, and Capital letter, under Capital, a. -- Small piece, a
Scotch coin worth about 2¼d. sterling, or about 4½cents. -- Small
register. See the Note under 1st Register, 7. -- Small stuff (Naut.),
spun yarn, marline, and the smallest kinds of rope. R. H. Dana, Jr. --
Small talk, light or trifling conversation; chitchat. -- Small wares
(Com.), various small textile articles, as tapes, braid, tringe, and
the like. M‘Culloch.

Small, adv. 1. In or to small extent, quantity, or degree; little;
slightly. [Obs.] "I wept but small." Chaucer. "It small avails my
mood." Shak.

2. Not loudly; faintly; timidly. [Obs. or Humorous]

    You may speak as small as you will.


Shak.

Small, n. 1. The small or slender part of a thing; as, the small of the
leg or of the back.

2. pl. Smallclothes. [Colloq.] Hood. Dickens.

3. pl. Same as Little go. See under Little, a.

Small, v. t. To make little or less. [Obs.]

Small"age (?), n. [Small + F. ache smallage. See Ach parsley.] (Bot.) A
biennial umbelliferous plant (Apium graveolens) native of the seacoats
of Europe and Asia. When deprived of its acrid and even poisonous
properties by cultivation, it becomes celery.

Small"clothes` (?), n. pl. A man's garment for the hips and thighs;
breeches. See Breeches.

Small"ish, a. Somewhat small. G. W. Cable.

Small"ness, n. The quality or state of being small.

Small"pox` (?), n. [Small + pox, pocks.] (Med.) A contagious,
constitutional, febrile disease characterized by a peculiar eruption;
variola. The cutaneous eruption is at first a collection of papules
which become vesicles (first flat, subsequently umbilicated) and then
pustules, and finally thick crusts which slough after a certain time,
often leaving a pit, or scar.

Smalls (?), n. pl. See Small, n., 2, 3.

Small"sword` (?), n. A light sword used for thrusting only; especially,
the sword worn by civilians of rank in the eighteenth century.

Smal"ly (?), adv. In a small quantity or degree; with minuteness. [R.]
Ascham.

Smalt (?), n. [It. smalto, LL. smaltum; of Teutonic origin; cf. OHG.
smalz grease, butter, G. schmalz grease, OHG. smelzan to melt, G.
schmelzen. See Smelt, v. t., and cf. Amel, Enamel.] A deep blue pigment
or coloring material used in various arts. It is a vitreous substance
made of cobalt, potash, and calcined quartz fused, and reduced to a
powder.

Smalt"-blue` (?), a. Deep blue, like smalt.

{ Smalt"ine (?), Smalt"ite (?), } n. [See Smalt.] (Min.) A tin- white
or gray mineral of metallic luster. It is an arsenide of cobalt,
nickel, and iron. Called also speiskobalt.

Smar"agd (?), n. [L. smaragdus. See Emerald.] The emerald. [Obs.] Bale.

Sma*rag"dine (?), a. [L. smaragdinus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;.] Of or
pertaining to emerald; resembling emerald; of an emerald green.

Sma*rag"dite (?), n. [Cf. F. smaragdite; -- so called from its
emerald-green color. See Smaragd.] (Min.) A green foliated kind of
amphibole, observed in eclogite and some varietis of gabbro.

Smart (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Smarted; p. pr. & vb. n. Smarting.] [OE.
smarten, AS. smeortan; akin to D. smarten, smerten, G. schmerzen, OHG.
smerzan, Dan. smerte, SW. smärta, D. smart, smert, a pain, G. schmerz,
Ohg. smerzo, and probably to L. mordere to bite; cf. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;,
&?;&?;&?;&?;&?;, terrible, fearful, Skr. m&?;d to rub, crush. Cf.
Morsel.] 1. To feel a lively, pungent local pain; -- said of some part
of the body as the seat of irritation; as, my finger smarts; these
wounds smart. Chaucer. Shak.

2. To feel a pungent pain of mind; to feel sharp pain or grief; to
suffer; to feel the sting of evil.

    No creature smarts so little as a fool.


Pope.

    He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it.


Prov. xi. 15.

Smart, v. t. To cause a smart in. "A goad that . . . smarts the flesh."
T. Adams.

Smart, n. [OE. smerte. See Smart, v. i.] 1. Quick, pungent, lively
pain; a pricking local pain, as the pain from puncture by nettles. "In
pain's smart." Chaucer.

2. Severe, pungent pain of mind; pungent grief; as, the smart of
affliction.

    To stand 'twixt us and our deserved smart.


Milton.

    Counsel mitigates the greatest smart.


Spenser.

3. A fellow who affects smartness, briskness, and vivacity; a dandy.
[Slang] Fielding.

4. Smart money (see below). [Canf]

Smart (?), a. [Compar. Smarter (?); superl. Smartest.] [OE. smerte. See
Smart, v. i.] 1. Causing a smart; pungent; pricking; as, a smart stroke
or taste.

    How smart lash that speech doth give my conscience.


Shak.

2. Keen; severe; poignant; as, smart pain.

3. Vigorous; sharp; severe. "Smart skirmishes, in which many fell."
Clarendon.

4. Accomplishing, or able to accomplish, results quickly; active;
sharp; clever. [Colloq.]

5. Efficient; vigorous; brilliant. "The stars shine smarter." Dryden.

6. Marked by acuteness or shrewdness; quick in suggestion or reply;
vivacious; witty; as, a smart reply; a smart saying.

    Who, for the poor renown of being smart Would leave a sting within
    a brother's heart?


Young.

    A sentence or two, . . . which I thought very smart.


Addison.

7. Pretentious; showy; spruce; as, a smart gown.

8. Brisk; fresh; as, a smart breeze.

Smart money. (a) Money paid by a person to buy himself off from some
unpleasant engagement or some painful situation. (b) (Mil.) Money
allowed to soldiers or sailors, in the English service, for wounds and
injures received; also, a sum paid by a recruit, previous to being
sworn in, to procure his release from service. (c) (Law) Vindictive or
exemplary damages; damages beyond a full compensation for the actual
injury done. Burrill. Greenleaf. -- Smart ticket, a certificate given
to wounded seamen, entitling them to smart money. [Eng.] Brande & C.

Syn. -- Pungent; poignant; sharp; tart; acute; quick; lively; brisk;
witty; clever; keen; dashy; showy. -- Smart, Clever. Smart has been
much used in New England to describe a person who is intelligent,
vigorous, and active; as, a smart young fellow; a smart workman, etc.,
conciding very nearly with the English sense of clever. The nearest
approach to this in England is in such expressions as, he was smart
(pungent or witty) in his reply, etc.; but smart and smartness, when
applied to persons, more commonly refer to dress; as, a smart
appearance; a smart gown, etc.

Smart"en (?), v. t. To make smart or spruce; -- usually with up.
[Colloq.]

    She had to go and smarten herself up somewhat.


W. Black.

Smar"tle (?), v. i. To waste away. [Prov. Eng.]

Smart"ly (?), adv. In a smart manner.

Smart"ness, n. The quality or state of being smart.

Smart"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) An acrid plant of the genus Polygonum (P.
Hydropiper), which produces smarting if applied where the skin is
tender.

Smash (smsh), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smashed (smsht); p. pr. & vb. n.
Smashing.] [Cf. Sw. smisk a blow, stroke, smiska to strike, dial. Sw.
smaske to kiss with a noise, and E. smack a loud kiss, a slap.] To
break in pieces by violence; to dash to pieces; to crush.

    Here everything is broken and smashed to pieces.


Burke.

Smash, v. i. To break up, or to pieces suddenly, as the result of
collision or pressure.

Smash, n. 1. A breaking or dashing to pieces; utter destruction; wreck.

2. Hence, bankruptcy. [Colloq.]

Smash"er (-r), n. 1. One who, or that which, smashes or breaks things
to pieces.

2. Anything very large or extraordinary. [Slang]

3. One who passes counterfeit coin. [Cant, Eng.]

Smatch (?), n. [OE. smach, smak. See Smack taste.] Taste; tincture;
smack. [Obs.]

    Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it.


Shak.

Smatch, v. i. To smack. [Obs.] Banister (1578).

Smat"ter (?), v. i. [OE. smateren to make a noise; cf. Sw. smattra to
clatter, to crackle, G. schmettern to dash, crash, to warble, quaver.]
1. To talk superficially or ignorantly; to babble; to chatter.

    Of state affairs you can not smatter.


Swift.

2. To have a slight taste, or a slight, superficial knowledge, of
anything; to smack.

Smat"ter, v. t. 1. To talk superficially about.

2. To gain a slight taste of; to acquire a slight, superficial
knowledge of; to smack. Chaucer.

Smat"ter, n. Superficial knowledge; a smattering.

Smat"ter*er (?), n. One who has only a slight, superficial knowledge; a
sciolist.

Smat"ter*ing, n. A slight, superficial knowledge of something;
sciolism.

    I had a great desire, not able to attain to a superficial skill in
    any, to have some smattering in all.


Burton.

Smear (smr), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smeared (smrd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Smearing.] [OE. smeren, smerien, AS. smierwan, smyrwan, fr. smeoru fat,
grease; akin to D. smeren, OHG. smirwen, G. schmieren, Icel. smyrja to
anoint. See Smear, n.] 1. To overspread with anything unctuous,
viscous, or adhesive; to daub; as, to smear anything with oil. "Smear
the sleepy grooms with blood." Shak.

2. To soil in any way; to contaminate; to pollute; to stain morally;
as, to be smeared with infamy. Shak.

Smear, n. [OE. smere,. smeoru fat, grease; akin to D. smeer, G.
schmeer, OHG. smero, Icel. smjör, Sw. & Dan. smör butter, Goth. smaírþr
fatness, smarna dung; cf. Lith. smarsas fat. Cf. Smirch.] 1. A fat,
oily substance; oinment. Johnson.

2. Hence, a spot made by, or as by, an unctuous or adhesive substance;
a blot or blotch; a daub; a stain.

    Slow broke the morn, All damp and rolling vapor, with no sun, But
    in its place a moving smear of light.


Alexander Smith.

Smear" dab" (?). (Zoöl.) The sand fluke (b). [Prov. Eng.]

Smeared (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the color mark ings ill defined, as if
rubbed; as, the smeared dagger moth (Apatela oblinita).

Smear"y (?), a. Tending to smear or soil; adhesive; viscous. Rowe.

Smeath (?), n. (Zoöl.) The smew. [Prov. Eng.]

Smec"tite (?), n. [G. smectit, fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; a kind of
fuller's earth, fr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; to wipe off.] (Min.) A hydrous
silicate of alumina, of a greenish color, which, in certain states of
humidity, appears transparent and almost gelatinous.

Smee (?), n. [Cf. Smew.] (Zoöl.) (a) The pintail duck. (b) The widgeon.
(c) The poachard. (d) The smew. [Prov. Eng.]

Smeeth (?), v. t. [Etymol. uncertain.] To smoke; to blacken with smoke;
to rub with soot. [Obs.]

Smeeth (?), v. t. [OE. sme&?;en, AS. sm&?;&?;ian. See Smooth.] To
smooth. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Smeg"ma (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; soap, fr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; to
wash off.] (Physiol.) The matter secreted by any of the sebaceous
glands. Specifically: (a) The soapy substance covering the skin of
newborn infants. (b) The cheesy, sebaceous matter which collects
between the glans penis and the foreskin.

Smeg*mat"ic (?), a. Being of the nature of soap; soapy; cleansing;
detersive.

Smeir (?), n. A salt glaze on pottery, made by adding common salt to an
earthenware glaze.

Smell (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smelled (?), Smelt (&?;); p. pr. & vb.
n. Smelling.] [OE. smellen, smillen, smullen; cf. LG. smellen, smelen,
smölen, schmelen, to smoke, to reek, D. smeulen to smolder, and E.
smolder. Cf. Smell, n.] 1. To perceive by the olfactory nerves, or
organs of smell; to have a sensation of, excited through the nasal
organs when affected by the appropriate materials or qualities; to
obtain the scent of; as, to smell a rose; to smell perfumes.

2. To detect or perceive, as if by the sense of smell; to scent out; --
often with out. "I smell a device." Shak.

    Can you smell him out by that?


Shak.

3. To give heed to. [Obs.]

    From that time forward I began to smellthe Word of God, and forsook
    the school doctors.


Latimer.

To smell a rat, to have a sense of something wrong, not clearly
evident; to have reason for suspicion. [Colloq.] -- To smell out, to
find out by sagacity. [Colloq.]

Smell, v. i. 1. To affect the olfactory nerves; to have an odor or
scent; -- often followed by of; as, to smell of smoke, or of musk.

2. To have a particular tincture or smack of any quality; to savor; as,
a report smells of calumny.

    Praises in an enemy are superfluous, or smell of craft.


Milton.

3. To exercise the sense of smell. Ex. xxx. 38.

4. To exercise sagacity. Shak.

Smell, n. [OE. smel, smil, smul, smeol. See Smell, v. t.] (Physiol.) 1.
The sense or faculty by which certain qualities of bodies are perceived
through the instrumentally of the olfactory nerves. See Sense.

2. The quality of any thing or substance, or emanation therefrom, which
affects the olfactory organs; odor; scent; fragrance; perfume; as, the
smell of mint.

    Breathing the smell of field and grove.


Milton.

    That which, above all others, yields the sweetest smell in the air,
    is the violent.


Bacon.

Syn. -- Scent; odor; perfume; fragrance.

Smell"er (?), n. 1. One who smells, or perceives by the sense of smell;
one who gives out smell.

2. The nose. [Pugilists' Slang]

Smell"-feast` (?), n. 1. One who is apt to find and frequent good
tables; a parasite; a sponger.

    The epicure and the smell-feast.


South.

2. A feast at which the guests are supposed to feed upon the odors only
of the viands.

Smell"ing, n. 1. The act of one who smells.

2. The sense by which odors are perceived; the sense of smell. Locke.

Smelling bottle, a small bottle filled with something suited to
stimulate the sense of smell, or to remove faintness, as spirits of
ammonia.

Smell"-less, a. Destitute of smell; having no odor.

    Daisies smell-less, yet most quaint.


Beau. & Fl.

Smelt (?), imp. & p. p. of Smell.

Smelt, n. [AS. smelt, smylt; akin to Dan. smelt.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of
numerous species of small silvery salmonoid fishes of the genus Osmerus
and allied genera, which ascend rivers to spawn, and sometimes become
landlocked in lakes. They are esteemed as food, and have a peculiar
odor and taste.

The most important species are the European smelt (Osmerus eperlans)
(called also eperlan, sparling, and spirling), the Eastern American
smelt (O. mordax), the California smelt (O. thalichthys), and the surf
smelt (Hypomesus olidus). The name is loosely applied to various other
small fishes, as the lant, the California tomcod, the spawn eater, the
silverside.

2. Fig.: A gull; a simpleton. [Obs.] Beau. & Fl.

Sand smelt (Zoöl.), the silverside.

Smelt, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smelted; p. pr. & vb. n. Smelting.] [Of
foreign origin; cf. Sw. smälta, D. smelten, Dan. smelte, Icel. smelta,
G. schmelzen OHG. smelzan, smelzen; probably akin to Gr.
&?;&?;&?;&?;&?;. Cf. Enamel, Melt, Mute, v. i., Smalt.] (Metal.) To
melt or fuse, as, ore, for the purpose of separating and refining the
metal; hence, to reduce; to refine; to flux or scorify; as, to smelt
tin.

<! p. 1359 !>

Smelt"er (?), n. One who, or that which, smelts.

Smelt"er*y (?), n. A house or place for smelting.

Smelt"ie (?), n. A fish, the bib. [Prov. Eng.]

Smelt"ing, a. & n. from Smelt.

Smelting furnace (Metal.), a furnace in which ores are smelted or
reduced.

Smerk (?), n. & v. See Smirk.

{ Smerk (?), Smerk"y (?), } a. Smart; jaunty; spruce. See Smirk, a.
[Obs.]

    So smerk, so smooth, his pricked ears.


Spenser.

Smer"lin (?), n. (Zoöl.) A small loach.

Smew (?), n. [Perhaps for ice- mew.] (Zoöl.) (a) small European
merganser (Mergus albellus) which has a white crest; -- called also
smee, smee duck, white merganser, and white nun. (b) The hooded
merganser. [Local, U.S.]

Smick"er (?), v. i. [Akin to Sw. smickra to flatter, Dan. smigre, and
perhaps to G. schmeicheln, and E. smile. Cf. Smicker, a.] To look
amorously or wantonly; to smirk.

Smick"er, a. [AS. smicere tasteful, trim. See Smicker, v.] Amorous;
wanton; gay; spruce. [Obs.]

Smick"er*ing, n. Amorous glance or inclination. [Obs.] "A smickering to
our young lady." Dryden.

Smick"et (?), n. [Dim. of smock.] A woman's under-garment; a smock.
[Obs. or Prov. Eng.] Johnson.

Smick"ly, adv. Smugly; finically. [Obs.] Ford.

Smid"dy (?), n. [See Smithy.] A smithy. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Smift (?), n. A match for firing a charge of powder, as in blasting; a
fuse.

Smight (?), v. t. To smite. [Obs.] Spenser.

Smil"a*cin (?), n. [Cf. F. similacine. See Smilax.] (Chem.) See
Parrilin.

Smi"lax (?), n. [L., bindweed, Gr. &?;&?;&?;.] (Bot.) (a) A genus of
perennial climbing plants, usually with a prickly woody stem; green
brier, or cat brier. The rootstocks of certain species are the source
of the medicine called sarsaparilla. (b) A delicate trailing plant
(Myrsiphyllum asparagoides) much used for decoration. It is a native of
the Cape of Good Hope.

Smile (sml), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Smiled (smld); p. pr. & vb. n.
Smiling.] [OE. smilen; akin to Dan. smile, Sw. smila, MHG. smielen,
smieren, L. mirari to wonder at, Skr. smi to smile; and probably to E.
smicker. &radic;173. Cf. Admire, Marvel, Smirk.] 1. To express
amusement, pleasure, moderate joy, or love and kindness, by the
features of the face; to laugh silently.

    He doth nothing but frown. . . . He hears merry tales and smiles
    not.


Shak.

    She smiled to see the doughty hero slain.


Pope.

    When last I saw thy young blue eyes, they smiled.


Byron.

2. To express slight contempt by a look implying sarcasm or pity; to
sneer.

    'T was what I said to Craggs and Child, Who praised my modesty, and
    smiled.


Pope.

3. To look gay and joyous; to have an appearance suited to excite joy;
as, smiling spring; smiling plenty.

    The desert smiled, And paradise was opened in the wild.


Pope.

4. To be propitious or favorable; to favor; to countenance; -- often
with on; as, to smile on one's labors.

Smile, v. t. 1. To express by a smile; as, to smile consent; to smile a
welcome to visitors.

2. To affect in a certain way with a smile. [R.]

    And sharply smile prevailing folly dead.


Young.

Smile, n. [CF. Dan. smiil, Sw. smil. See Smile, v. i.] 1. The act of
smiling; a peculiar change or brightening of the face, which expresses
pleasure, moderate joy, mirth, approbation, or kindness; -- opposed to
frown.

    Sweet intercourse Of looks and smiles: for smiles from reason flow.


Milton.

2. A somewhat similar expression of countenance, indicative of
satisfaction combined with malevolent feelings, as contempt, scorn,
etc; as, a scornful smile.

3. Favor; countenance; propitiousness; as, the smiles of Providence.
"The smile of heaven." Shak.

4. Gay or joyous appearance; as, the smiles of spring.

    The brightness of their [the flowers'] smile was gone.


Bryant.

Smile"less (?), a. Not having a smile.

Smil"er (?), n. One who smiles. Tennyson.

Smil"et (?), n. A little smile. [R.]

    Those happy smilets That played on her ripe lip.


Shak.

Smil"ing*ly, adv. In a smiling manner. Shak.

Smil"ing*ness, n. Quality or state of being smiling.

    And made despair a smilingness assume.


Byron.

Smi"lo*don (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; a carving knife + &?;&?;&?;,
&?;&?;&?;, tooth.] (Paleon.) An extinct genus of saber-toothed tigers.
See Mach&?;rodus.

Smilt (?), v. i. To melt. [Obs.] Mortimer.

Smin*thu"rid (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; a mouse + &?;&?;&?; tail.] (Zoöl.)
Any one of numerous small species of springtails, of the family
Sminthuridæ, -- usually found on flowers. See Illust. under Collembola.

Smirch (?), v. t. [From the root of smear.] To smear with something
which stains, or makes dirty; to smutch; to begrime; to soil; to sully.

    I'll . . . with a kind of umber smirch my face.


Shak.

Smirch (?), n. A smutch; a dirty stain.

Smirk (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Smirked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Smirking.]
[OE. smirken, ASS. smercian, smearcian; cf. MHG. smieren, smielen, to
smile. See Smile, v. i.] To smile in an affected or conceited manner;
to smile with affected complaisance; to simper.

Smirk, n. A forced or affected smile; a simper.

    The bride, all smirk and blush, had just entered.


Sir W. Scott.

Smirk, a. Nice,; smart; spruce; affected; simpering. "So smirk, so
smooth." Spenser.

Smirk"ing*ly, adv. With smirking; with a smirk.

Smirk"y (?), a. Smirk; smirking.

Smit (?), rare imp. & p. p. of Smite. Spenser.

    Smit with the beauty of so fair a scene.


Cowper.

Smit, obs. 3d. pers. sing. pres. of Smite. Chaucer.

Smite (smt), v. t. [imp. Smote (smt), rarely Smit (smt); p. p. Smitten
(smt"t'n), rarely Smit, or Smote; p. pr. & vb. n. Smiting (smt"ng).]
[AS. smtan to smite, to soil, pollute; akin to OFries. smta to smite,
LG. smiten, D. smijten, G. schmeissen, OHG. smzan to smear, stroke,
OSw. & dial. Sw. smita to smite, Dan. smide to throw, Goth. bismeitan,
to anoint, besmear; cf. Skr. md to be fat. The original sense seems to
have been, to daub on, to smear. Cf. Smut.] 1. To strike; to inflict a
blow upon with the hand, or with any instrument held in the hand, or
with a missile thrown by the hand; as, to smite with the fist, with a
rod, sword, spear, or stone.

    Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
    other also.


Matt. v. 39.

    And David . . . took thence a stone, and slang it, and smote the
    Philistine in his forehead.


1 Sam. xvii. 49.

2. To cause to strike; to use as an instrument in striking or hurling.

    Prophesy, and smite thine hands together.


Ezek. xxi. 14.

    Saul . . . smote the javelin into the wall.


1 Sam. xix. 10.

3. To destroy the life of by beating, or by weapons of any kind; to
slay by a blow; to kill; as, to smite one with the sword, or with an
arrow or other instrument.

4. To put to rout in battle; to overthrow by war.

5. To blast; to destroy the life or vigor of, as by a stroke or by some
visitation.

    The flax and the barly was smitten.


Ex. ix. 31.

6. To afflict; to chasten; to punish.

    Let us not mistake God's goodness, nor imagine, because he smites
    us, that we are forsaken by him.


Wake.

7. To strike or affect with passion, as love or fear.

    The charms that smite the simple heart.


Pope.

    Smit with the love of sister arts we came.


Pope.

To smite off, to cut off. -- To smite out, to knock out, as a tooth.
Exod. xxi. 27. -- To smite with the tongue, to reproach or upbraid; to
revile. [Obs.] Jer. xviii. 18.

Smite, v. i. To strike; to collide; to beat. [Archaic]

    The heart melteth, and the knees smite together.


Nah. ii. 10.

Smite, n. The act of smiting; a blow.

Smit"er (smt"r), n. One who smites.

    I give my back to the smiters.


Isa. l. 6.

Smith (smth), n. [AS. smið; akin to D. smid, G. schmied, OHG. smid,
Icel. smiðr, Dan. & Sw. smed, Goth. smiþa (in comp.); cf. Gr. smi`lh a
sort of knife, sminy`h a hoe, mattock.] 1. One who forges with the
hammer; one who works in metals; as, a blacksmith, goldsmith,
silversmith, and the like. Piers Plowman.

    Nor yet the smith hath learned to form a sword.


Tate.

2. One who makes or effects anything. [R.] Dryden.

Smith, v. t. [AS. smiðian. See Smith, n.] To beat into shape; to forge.
[Obs.] Chaucer.

    What smith that any [weapon] smitheth.


Piers Plowman.

Smith"craft` (-krft`), n. The art or occupation of a smith; smithing.
[R.] Sir W. Raleigh.

Smith"er (sm"r), n. 1. Light, fine rain. [Prov. Eng.]

2. pl. Fragments; atoms; finders. [Prov. Eng.]

    Smash the bottle to smithers.


Tennyson.

Smith`er*eens" (sm`r*nz"), n. pl. Fragments; atoms; smithers. [Colloq.]
W. Black.

Smith"er*y (smth"r*), n.; pl. -ies (-z). 1. The workshop of a smith; a
smithy or stithy.

2. Work done by a smith; smithing.

    The din of all his smithery may some time or other possibly wake
    this noble duke.


Burke.

Smith"ing, n. The act or art of working or forging metals, as iron,
into any desired shape. Moxon.

Smith*so"ni*an (-s"n*an), a. Of or pertaining to the Englishman J. L.
M. Smithson, or to the national institution of learning which he
endowed at Washington, D. C.; as, the Smithsonian Institution;
Smithsonian Reports. -- n. The Smithsonian Institution.

Smith"son*ite (?), n. [See Smithsonian.] (Min.) Native zinc carbonate.
It generally occurs in stalactitic, reniform, or botryoidal shapes, of
a white to gray, green, or brown color. See Note under Calamine.

Smith"y (-), n. [AS. smiððe, fr. smið; akin to D. smidse, smids, OHG.
smitta, G. schmiede, Icel. smiðja. See Smith, n.] The workshop of a
smith, esp. a blacksmith; a smithery; a stithy. [Written also smiddy.]

    Under a spreading chestnut tree The village smithy stands.


Longfellow.

Smitt (smt), n. [CF. G. schmitz a stain, schmitzen besmear. See Smite,
v. t.] Fine clay or ocher made up into balls, used for marking sheep.
[Eng.] Woodward.

Smit"ten (smt"t'n), p. p. of Smite.

Smit"tle (-t'l), v. t. [Freq. fr. OE. smitten to befoul. See Smite, v.
t.] To infect. [Prov. Eng.]

Smit"tle, n. Infection. [Pov. Eng.] Wright.

{ Smit"tle (smt"t'l), Smit"tlish (- tlsh), } a. Infectious; catching.
[Scot. & Prov. Eng.] H. Kingsley.

Smock (smk), n. [AS. smocc; akin to OHG. smocho, Icel. smokkr, and from
the root of AS. smgan to creep, akin to G. schmiegen to cling to, press
close, MHG. smiegen, Icel. smjga to creep through, to put on a garment
which has a hole to put the head through; cf. Lith. smukti to glide.
Cf. Smug, Smuggle.] 1. A woman's under- garment; a shift; a chemise.

    In her smock, with head and foot all bare.


Chaucer.

2. A blouse; a smoock frock. Carlyle.

Smock (?), a. Of or pertaining to a smock; resembling a smock; hence,
of or pertaining to a woman.

Smock mill, a windmill of which only the cap turns round to meet the
wind, in distinction from a post mill, whose whole building turns on a
post. -- Smock race, a race run by women for the prize of a smock.
[Prov. Eng.]

Smock, v. t. To provide with, or clothe in, a smock or a smock frock.
Tennyson.

Smock"-faced` (?), a. Having a feminine countenance or complexion;
smooth-faced; girlish. Fenton.

Smock" frock` (?). A coarse frock, or shirt, worn over the other dress,
as by farm laborers. Macaulay.

Smock"less, a. Wanting a smock. Chaucer.

Smok"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being smoked; suitable or ready to be
smoked; as, smokable tobacco.

Smoke (?), n. [AS. smoca, fr. smeócan to smoke; akin to LG. & D. smook
smoke, Dan. smög, G. schmauch, and perh. to Gr. &?;&?;&?; to burn in a
smoldering fire; cf. Lith. smaugti to choke.] 1. The visible
exhalation, vapor, or substance that escapes, or expelled, from a
burning body, especially from burning vegetable matter, as wood, coal,
peat, or the like.

The gases of hydrocarbons, raised to a red heat or thereabouts, without
a mixture of air enough to produce combustion, disengage their carbon
in a fine powder, forming smoke. The disengaged carbon when deposited
on solid bodies is soot.

2. That which resembles smoke; a vapor; a mist.

3. Anything unsubstantial, as idle talk. Shak.

4. The act of smoking, esp. of smoking tobacco; as, to have a smoke.
[Colloq.]

Smoke is sometimes joined with other word. forming self-explaining
compounds; as, smoke-consuming, smoke- dried, smoke-stained, etc.

Smoke arch, the smoke box of a locomotive. -- Smoke ball (Mil.), a ball
or case containing a composition which, when it burns, sends forth
thick smoke. -- Smoke black, lampblack. [Obs.] -- Smoke board, a board
suspended before a fireplace to prevent the smoke from coming out into
the room. -- Smoke box, a chamber in a boiler, where the smoke, etc.,
from the furnace is collected before going out at the chimney. -- Smoke
sail (Naut.), a small sail in the lee of the galley stovepipe, to
prevent the smoke from annoying people on deck. -- Smoke tree (Bot.), a
shrub (Rhus Cotinus) in which the flowers are mostly abortive and the
panicles transformed into tangles of plumose pedicels looking like
wreaths of smoke. -- To end in smoke, to burned; hence, to be destroyed
or ruined; figuratively, to come to nothing.

Syn. -- Fume; reek; vapor.

Smoke, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Smoked (?); p. pr. & vb n. Smoking.] [AS.
smocian; akin to D. smoken, G. schmauchen, Dan. smöge. See Smoke, n.]
1. To emit smoke; to throw off volatile matter in the form of vapor or
exhalation; to reek.

    Hard by a cottage chimney smokes.


Milton.

2. Hence, to burn; to be kindled; to rage.

    The anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke agains. that
    man.


Deut. xxix. 20.

3. To raise a dust or smoke by rapid motion.

    Proud of his steeds, he smokes along the field.


Dryden.

4. To draw into the mouth the smoke of tobacco burning in a pipe or in
the form of a cigar, cigarette, etc.; to habitually use tobacco in this
manner.

5. To suffer severely; to be punished.

    Some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.


Shak.

Smoke, v. t. 1. To apply smoke to; to hang in smoke; to disinfect, to
cure, etc., by smoke; as, to smoke or fumigate infected clothing; to
smoke beef or hams for preservation.

2. To fill or scent with smoke; hence, to fill with incense; to
perfume. "Smoking the temple." Chaucer.

3. To smell out; to hunt out; to find out; to detect.

    I alone Smoked his true person, talked with him.


Chapman.

    He was first smoked by the old Lord Lafeu.


Shak.

    Upon that . . . I began to smoke that they were a parcel of
    mummers.


Addison.

4. To ridicule to the face; to quiz. [Old Slang]

5. To inhale and puff out the smoke of, as tobacco; to burn or use in
smoking; as, to smoke a pipe or a cigar.

6. To subject to the operation of smoke, for the purpose of annoying or
driving out; -- often with out; as, to smoke a woodchuck out of his
burrow.

Smoke"-dry` (?), v. t. To dry by or in smoke.

Smoke"house` (?), n. A building where meat or fish is cured by
subjecting it to a dense smoke.

Smoke"jack` (?), n. A contrivance for turning a spit by means of a fly
or wheel moved by the current of ascending air in a chimney.

Smoke"less, a. Making or having no smoke. "Smokeless towers." Pope.

Smok"er (?), n. 1. One who dries or preserves by smoke.

2. One who smokes tobacco or the like.

3. A smoking car or compartment. [U. S.]

Smoke"stack` (?), n. A chimney; esp., a pipe serving as a chimney, as
the pipe which carries off the smoke of a locomotive, the funnel of a
steam vessel, etc.

<! p. 1360 !>

Smok"i*ly (?), adv. In a smoky manner.

Smok"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being smoky.

Smok"ing, a. & n. from Smoke.

Smoking bean (Bot.), the long pod of the catalpa, or Indian-bean tree,
often smoked by boys as a substitute for cigars. -- Smoking car, a
railway car carriage reserved for the use of passengers who smoke
tobacco.

Smok"y (?), a. [Compar. Smokier (?); superl. Smokiest.] 1. Emitting
smoke, esp. in large quantities or in an offensive manner; fumid; as,
smoky fires.

2. Having the appearance or nature of smoke; as, a smoky fog.
"Unlustrous as the smoky light." Shak.

3. Filled with smoke, or with a vapor resembling smoke; thick; as, a
smoky atmosphere.

4. Subject to be filled with smoke from chimneys or fireplace; as, a
smoky house.

5. Tarnished with smoke; noisome with smoke; as, smoky rafters; smoky
cells.

6. Suspicious; open to suspicion. [Obs.] Foote.

Smoky quartz (Min.), a variety of quartz crystal of a pale to dark
smoky-brown color. See Quartz.

{ Smol"der, Smoul"der } (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Smoldered (?) or
Smouldered; p. pr. & vb. n. Smoldering or Smouldering.] [OE. smolderen;
cf. Prov. G. smölen, smelen, D. smeulen. Cf. Smell.] 1. To burn and
smoke without flame; to waste away by a slow and supressed combustion.

    The smoldering dust did round about him smoke.


Spenser.

2. To exist in a state of suppressed or smothered activity; to burn
inwardly; as, a smoldering feud.

{ Smol"der, Smoul"der, } v. t. To smother; to suffocate; to choke.
[Obs.] Holinshed. Palsgrave.

{ Smol"der, Smoul"der, } n. Smoke; smother. [Obs.]

    The smolder stops our nose with stench.


Gascoigne.

{ Smol"der*ing, Smoul"der*ing, } a. Being in a state of suppressed
activity; quiet but not dead.

    Some evil chance Will make the smoldering scandal break and blaze.


Tennyson.

{ Smol"der*ing*ness, Smoul"der*ing*ness } (?), n. The state of
smoldering.

{ Smol"dry, Smoul"dry } (?), a. Smoldering; suffocating; smothery.
[Obs.]

    A flaming fire ymixt with smoldry smoke.


Spenser.

Smolt (?), n. (Zoöl.) A young salmon two or three years old, when it
has acquired its silvery color.

Smooch (?), v. t. See Smutch.

Smoor (?), v. t. [AS. smorian; akin to D. & LG. smoren, G. schmoren to
stew. Cf. Smother.] To suffocate or smother. [Written also smore.]
[Obs. or Prov. Eng. & Scot.] Sir T. More. Burns.

Smooth (sm), a. [Compar. Smoother (-r); superl. Smoothest.] [OE.
smothe, smethe, AS. smðe, smœðe, where , œ, come from an older ; cf.
LG. smöde, smöe, smödig; of uncertain origin.] 1. Having an even
surface, or a surface so even that no roughness or points can be
perceived by the touch; not rough; as, smooth glass; smooth porcelain.
Chaucer.

    The outlines must be smooth, imperceptible to the touch, and even,
    without eminence or cavities.


Dryden.

2. Evenly spread or arranged; sleek; as, smooth hair.

3. Gently flowing; moving equably; not ruffled or obstructed; as, a
smooth stream.

4. Flowing or uttered without check, obstruction, or hesitation; not
harsh; voluble; even; fluent.

    The only smooth poet of those times.


Milton.

    Waller was smooth; but Dryden taught to join The varying verse, the
    full-resounding line.


Pope.

    When sage Minerva rose, From her sweet lips smooth elocution flows.


Gay.

5. Bland; mild; smoothing; fattering.

    This smooth discourse and mild behavior oft Conceal a traitor.


Addison.

6. (Mech. & Physics) Causing no resistance to a body sliding along its
surface; frictionless.

Smooth is often used in the formation of selfexplaining compounds; as,
smooth-bodied, smooth- browed, smooth-combed, smooth-faced, smooth-
finished, smooth-gliding, smooth-grained, smooth- leaved,
smooth-sliding, smooth-speaking, smooth- woven, and the like.

Syn. -- Even; plain; level; flat; polished; glossy; sleek; soft; bland;
mild; soothing; voluble; flattering; adulatory; deceptive.

Smooth, adv. Smoothly. Chaucer.

    Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep.


Shak.

Smooth, n. 1. The act of making smooth; a stroke which smooths.
Thackeray.

2. That which is smooth; the smooth part of anything. "The smooth of
his neck." Gen. xxvii. 16.

Smooth, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smoothed (smthd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Smoothing.] [OE. smothen, smethen, AS. smðian; cf. LG. smöden. See
Smooth, a.] To make smooth; to make even on the surface by any means;
as, to smooth a board with a plane; to smooth cloth with an iron.
Specifically: --

(a) To free from obstruction; to make easy.

    Thou, Abelard! the last sad office pay, And smooth my passage to
    the realms of day.


Pope.

(b) To free from harshness; to make flowing.

    In their motions harmony divine So smooths her charming tones that
    God's own ear Listens delighted.


Milton.

(c) To palliate; to gloze; as, to smooth over a fault.

(d) To give a smooth or calm appearance to.

    Each perturbation smoothed with outward calm.


Milton.

(e) To ease; to regulate. Dryden.

Smooth, v. i. To flatter; to use blandishment.

    Because I can not flatter and speak fair, Smile in men's faces,
    smooth, deceive and cog.


Shak.

Smooth"bore` (?), a. (Gun.) Having a bore of perfectly smooth surface;
-- distinguished from rifled. -- n. A smoothbore firearm.

Smooth"-chinned` (?), a. Having a smooth chin; beardless. Drayton.

Smooth"en (?), v. t. To make smooth. [Obs.]

Smooth"er (?), n. One who, or that which, smooths.

Smooth"ing, a. & n. fr. Smooth, v.

Smoothing iron, an iron instrument with a polished face, for smoothing
clothes; a sadiron; a flatiron. -- Smoothing plane, a short, finely set
plane, for smoothing and finishing work.

Smooth"ly, adv. In a smooth manner.

Smooth"ness, n. Quality or state of being smooth.

Smooth"-spo`ken (?), a. Speaking smoothly; plausible; flattering;
smooth-tongued.

Smooth"-tongued` (?), a. Having a smooth tongue; plausible; flattering.

Smore (?), v. t. To smother. See Smoor. [Obs.]

    Some dying vomit blood, and some were smored.


Du Bartas.

{ ||Smor*zan"do (?), ||Smor*sa"to (?), } a. [It.] (Mus.) Growing
gradually fainter and softer; dying away; morendo.

Smote (?), imp. (&and; rare p. p.) of Smite.

Smo"ter*lich (?), a. [CF. Smut.] Dirty; foul. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Smoth"er (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smothered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Smothering.] [OE. smotheren; akin to E. smoor. See Smoor.] 1. To
destroy the life of by suffocation; to deprive of the air necessary for
life; to cover up closely so as to prevent breathing; to suffocate; as,
to smother a child.

2. To affect as by suffocation; to stife; to deprive of air by a thick
covering, as of ashes, of smoke, or the like; as, to smother a fire.

3. Hence, to repress the action of; to cover from public view; to
suppress; to conceal; as, to smother one's displeasure.

Smoth"er, v. i. 1. To be suffocated or stifled.

2. To burn slowly, without sufficient air; to smolder.

Smoth"er, n. [OE. smorther. See Smother, v. t.] 1. Stifling smoke;
thick dust. Shak.

2. A state of suppression. [Obs.]

    Not to keep their suspicions in smother.


Bacon.

Smother fly (Zoöl.), an aphid.

Smoth"er*i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being smothery.

Smoth"er*ing*ly, adv. In a smothering manner.

Smoth"er*y (?), a. Tending to smother; stifling.

Smouch (?), v. t. [Akin to smack.] To kiss closely. [Obs.] P. Stubbes.

Smouch, v. t. [See Smutch.] To smutch; to soil; as, to smouch the face.

Smouch, n. A dark soil or stain; a smutch.

Smoul"der (?), v. i. See Smolder.

Smoul"dry (?), a. See Smoldry.

Smudge (?), n. [Cf. Dan. smuds smut, E. smutch, or smoke.] 1. A
suffocating smoke. Grose.

2. A heap of damp combustibles partially ignited and burning slowly,
placed on the windward side of a house, tent, or the like, in order, by
the thick smoke, to keep off mosquitoes or other insects. [U. S.]
Bartlett.

3. That which is smeared upon anything; a stain; a blot; a smutch; a
smear.

Smudge, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smudged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Smudging.] 1.
To stifle or smother with smoke; to smoke by means of a smudge.

2. To smear; to smutch; to soil; to blacken with smoke.

Smudg"i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being smudged, soiled, or
blurred. C. A. Young.

Smug (?), a. [Of. Scand. or Low German origin; cf. LG. smuck, G.
schmuck, Dan. smuk, OSw. smuck, smöck, and E. smock, smuggle; cf. G.
schmuck ornament. See Smock.] Studiously neat or nice, especially in
dress; spruce; affectedly precise; smooth and prim.

    They be so smug and smooth.


Robynson (More's Utopia).

    The smug and scanty draperies of his style.


De Quincey.

    A young, smug, handsome holiness has no fellow.


Beau. & Fl.

Smug, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smugged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Smugging.] To
make smug, or spruce. [Obs.]

    Thus said, he smugged his beard, and stroked up fair.


Dryton.

Smug"gle (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smuggled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Smuggling (?).] [Of Low German or Scand. origin; cf. LG. smuggeln, D.
smokkelen, G. schmuggeln, Dan. smugle, Sw. smyga to introduce or convey
secretly, Dan. i smug secretly, D. smuigen to eat in secret, AS.
sm&?;gan to creep. See Smock.] 1. To import or export secretly,
contrary to the law; to import or export without paying the duties
imposed by law; as, to smuggle lace.

2. Fig.: To convey or introduce clandestinely.

Smug"gle, v. i. To import or export in violation of the customs laws.

Smug"gler (?), n. 1. One who smuggles.

2. A vessel employed in smuggling.

Smug"ly, adv. In a smug manner. [R.] Gay.

Smug"ness, n. The quality or state of being smug.

Smut (?), n. [Akin to Sw. smuts, Dan. smuds, MHG. smuz, G. schmutz, D.
smet a spot or stain, smoddig, smodsig, smodderig, dirty, smodderen to
smut; and probably to E. smite. See Smite, v. t., and cf. Smitt,
Smutch.] 1. Foul matter, like soot or coal dust; also, a spot or soil
made by such matter.

2. (Mining) Bad, soft coal, containing much earthy matter, found in the
immediate locality of faults.

3. (Bot.) An affection of cereal grains producing a swelling which is
at length resolved into a powdery sooty mass. It is caused by parasitic
fungi of the genus Ustilago. Ustilago segetum, or U. Carbo, is the
commonest kind; that of Indian corn is Ustilago maydis.

4. Obscene language; ribaldry; obscenity.

    He does not stand upon decency . . . but will talk smut, though a
    priest and his mother be in the room.


Addison.

Smut mill, a machine for cleansing grain from smut.

Smut (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smutted; p. pr. & vb. n. Smutting.] 1. To
stain or mark with smut; to blacken with coal, soot, or other dirty
substance.

2. To taint with mildew, as grain. Bacon.

3. To blacken; to sully or taint; to tarnish.

4. To clear of smut; as, to smut grain for the mill.

Smut, v. i. 1. To gather smut; to be converted into smut; to become
smutted. Mortimer.

2. To give off smut; to crock.

Smutch (?), n. [Prob. for smuts. See Smut, n.] A stain; a dirty spot.
B. Jonson.

Smutch, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Smutched (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Smutching.]
To blacken with smoke, soot, or coal. [Written also smooch.] B. Jonson.

Smutch"in (?), n. Snuff. [Obs.] Howell.

Smut"ty (?), a. [Compar. Smuttier (?); superl. Smuttiest.] 1. Soiled
with smut; smutted.

2. Tainted with mildew; as, smutty corn.

3. Obscene; not modest or pure; as, a smutty saying.

    The smutty joke, ridiculously lewd.


Smollett.

-- Smut"ti*ly (#), adv. -- Smut"ti*ness, n.

Smyr"ni*ot (?), a. Of or pertaining to Smyrna. -- n. A native or
inhabitant of Smyrna.

Snack (?), n. [See Snatch, v. t.] 1. A share; a part or portion; --
obsolete, except in the colloquial phrase, to go snacks, i. e., to
share.

    At last he whispers, "Do, and we go snacks."


Pope.

2. A slight, hasty repast. [Colloq.]

Snack"et (?), n. See Snecket. [Prov. Eng.]

Snac"ot (?), n. [Said to be corrupted fr. NL. syngnathus, fr. Gr. sy`n
together + gna`qos jaw, because the jaws can be only slightly
separated.] (Zoöl.) A pipefish of the genus Syngnathus. See Pipefish.

Snaf"fle (?), n. [D. snavel a beak, bill, snout; akin to G. schnabel,
OHG. snabul,. sneb, snebbe, OFries. snavel mouth, Dan. & Sw. snabel
beak, bill, Lith. snapas, and to E. snap, v. See Snap, and cf. Neb.] A
kind of bridle bit, having a joint in the part to be placed in the
mouth, and rings and cheek pieces at the ends, but having no curb; --
called also snaffle bit.

Snaf"fle, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snaffled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snaffling
(?).] To put a snaffle in the mouth of; to subject to the snaffle; to
bridle.

Snag (?), n. [Prov. E., n., a lump on a tree where a branch has been
cut off; v., to cut off the twigs and small branches from a tree, of
Celtic origin; cf. Gael. snaigh, snaidh, to cut down, to prune, to
sharpen, p. p. snaighte, snaidhte, cut off, lopped, Ir. snaigh a
hewing, cutting.] 1. A stump or base of a branch that has been lopped
off; a short branch, or a sharp or rough branch; a knot; a
protuberance.

    The coat of arms Now on a naked snag in triumph borne.


Dryden.

2. A tooth projecting beyond the rest; contemptuously, a broken or
decayed tooth. Prior.

3. A tree, or a branch of a tree, fixed in the bottom of a river or
other navigable water, and rising nearly or quite to the surface, by
which boats are sometimes pierced and sunk.

4. (Zoöl.) One of the secondary branches of an antler.

Snag boat, a steamboat fitted with apparatus for removing snags and
other obstructions in navigable streams. [U.S.] -- Snag tooth. Same as
Snag, 2.

    How thy snag teeth stand orderly, Like stakes which strut by the
    water side.


J. Cotgrave.

Snag, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snagged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snagging (?).]
1. To cut the snags or branches from, as the stem of a tree; to hew
roughly. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

2. To injure or destroy, as a steamboat or other vessel, by a snag, or
projecting part of a sunken tree. [U. S.]

Snag"ged (?), a. Full of snags; snaggy.

Snag"gy (?), a. 1. Full of snags; full of short, rough branches or
sharp points; abounding with knots. "Upon a snaggy oak." Spenser.

2. Snappish; cross; ill-tempered. [Prov. Eng.]

Snail (snl), n. [OE. snaile, AS. snægel, snegel, snægl; akin to G.
schnecke, OHG. snecko, Dan. snegl, Icel. snigill.] 1. (Zoöl.) (a) Any
one of numerous species of terrestrial air-breathing gastropods
belonging to the genus Helix and many allied genera of the family
Helicidæ. They are abundant in nearly all parts of the world except the
arctic regions, and feed almost entirely on vegetation; a land snail.
(b) Any gastropod having a general resemblance to the true snails,
including fresh-water and marine species. See Pond snail, under Pond,
and Sea snail.

2. Hence, a drone; a slow-moving person or thing.

3. (Mech.) A spiral cam, or a flat piece of metal of spirally curved
outline, used for giving motion to, or changing the position of,
another part, as the hammer tail of a striking clock.

4. A tortoise; in ancient warfare, a movable roof or shed to protect
besiegers; a testudo. [Obs.]

    They had also all manner of gynes [engines] . . . that needful is
    [in] taking or sieging of castle or of city, as snails, that was
    naught else but hollow pavises and targets, under the which men,
    when they fought, were heled [protected], . . . as the snail is in
    his house; therefore they cleped them snails.


Vegetius (Trans.).

5. (Bot.) The pod of the sanil clover.

Ear snail, Edible snail, Pond snail, etc. See under Ear, Edible, etc.
-- Snail borer (Zoöl.), a boring univalve mollusk; a drill. -- Snail
clover (Bot.), a cloverlike plant (Medicago scuttellata, also, M.
Helix); -- so named from its pods, which resemble the shells of snails;
-- called also snail trefoil, snail medic, and beehive. -- Snail flower
(Bot.), a leguminous plant (Phaseolus Caracalla) having the keel of the
carolla spirally coiled like a snail shell. -- Snail shell (Zoöl.), the
shell of snail. -- Snail trefoil. (Bot.) See Snail clover, above.

Snail"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) See Sea snail (a).

<! p. 1361 !>

Snail"-like` (?), a. Like or suiting a snail; as, snail-like progress.

Snail"-like`, adv. In the manner of a snail; slowly.

Snail"-paced` (?), a. Slow-moving, like a snail.

    Bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.


Shak.

'Snails (?), interj. God's nails, or His nails, that is, the nails with
which the Savior was fastened to the cross; -- an ancient form of oath,
corresponding to 'Od's bodikins (dim. of body, i.e., God's dear body).
Beau. & Fl.

Snake (?), n. [AS. snaca; akin to LG. snake, schnake, Icel. snkr,
sn&?;kr, Dan. snog, Sw. snok; of uncertain origin.] (Zoöl.) Any species
of the order Ophidia; an ophidian; a serpent, whether harmless or
venomous. See Ophidia, and Serpent.

Snakes are abundant in all warm countries, and much the larger number
are harmless to man.

Blind snake, Garter snake, Green snake, King snake, Milk snake, Rock
snake, Water snake, etc. See under Blind, Garter, etc. -- Fetich snake
(Zoöl.), a large African snake (Python Sebæ) used by the natives as a
fetich. -- Ringed snake (Zoöl.), a common European columbrine snake
(Tropidonotus natrix). -- Snake eater. (Zoöl.) (a) The markhoor. (b)
The secretary bird. -- Snake fence, a worm fence (which see). [U.S.] --
Snake fly (Zoöl.), any one of several species of neuropterous insects
of the genus Rhaphidia; -- so called because of their large head and
elongated neck and prothorax. -- Snake gourd (Bot.), a cucurbitaceous
plant (Trichosanthes anguina) having the fruit shorter and less
snakelike than that of the serpent cucumber. -- Snake killer. (Zoöl.)
(a) The secretary bird. (b) The chaparral cock. -- Snake moss (Bot.),
the common club moss (Lycopodium clavatum). See Lycopodium. -- Snake
nut (Bot.), the fruit of a sapindaceous tree (Ophiocaryon paradoxum) of
Guiana, the embryo of which resembles a snake coiled up. -- Tree snake
(Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of colubrine snakes which
habitually live in trees, especially those of the genus Dendrophis and
allied genera.

Snake, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snaked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snaking.] 1. To
drag or draw, as a snake from a hole; -- often with out. [Colloq. U.S.]
Bartlett.

2. (Naut.) To wind round spirally, as a large rope with a smaller, or
with cord, the small rope lying in the spaces between the strands of
the large one; to worm.

Snake, v. i. To crawl like a snake.

Snake"bird` (?), n. [So named from its snakelike neck.] (Zoöl.) 1. Any
one of four species of aquatic birds of the genus Anhinga or Plotus.
They are allied to the gannets and cormorants, but have very long,
slender, flexible necks, and sharp bills.

The American species (Anhinga, or Plotus, anhinga) inhabits the
Southern United States and tropical America; -- called also darter, and
water turkey. The Asiatic species (A. melanogaster) is native of
Southern Asia and the East Indies. Two other species inhabit Africa and
Australia respectively.

2. (Zoöl.) The wryneck.

Snake"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The band fish. (b) The lizard fish.

Snake"head` (?), n. 1. A loose, bent-up end of one of the strap rails,
or flat rails, formerly used on American railroads. It was sometimes so
bent by the passage of a train as to slip over a wheel and pierce the
bottom of a car.

2. (Bot.) (a) The turtlehead. (b) The Guinea-hen flower. See
Snake's-head, and under Guinea.

Snake"neck` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The snakebird, 1.

Snake"root` (?), n. (Bot.) Any one of several plants of different
genera and species, most of which are (or were formerly) reputed to be
efficacious as remedies for the bites of serpents; also, the roots of
any of these.

The Virginia snakeroot is Aristolochia Serpentaria; black snakeroot is
Sanicula, esp. S. Marilandica, also Cimicifuga racemosa; Seneca
snakeroot is Polygala Senega; button snakeroot is Liatris, also
Eryngium; white snakeroot is Eupatorium ageratoides. The name is also
applied to some others besides these.

Snake's"-head` (?), n. (Bot.) The Guinea-hen flower; -- so called in
England because its spotted petals resemble the scales of a snake's
head. Dr. Prior.

Snake's-head iris (Bot.), an iridaceous plant (Hermodactylus tuberosus)
of the Mediterranean region. The flowers slightly resemble a serpent's
open mouth.

Snake"stone` (?), n. 1. A kind of hone slate or whetstone obtained in
Scotland.

2. (Paleon.) An ammonite; -- so called from its form, which resembles
that of a coiled snake.

Snake's-tongue` (?), n. (Bot.) Same as Adder's-tongue.

Snake"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) (a) A kind of knotweed (Polygonum Bistorta).
(b) The Virginia snakeroot. See Snakeroot.

Snake"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) (a) An East Indian climbing plant (Strychnos
colubrina) having a bitter taste, and supposed to be a remedy for the
bite of the hooded serpent. (b) An East Indian climbing shrub
(Ophioxylon serpentinum) which has the roots and stems twisted so as to
resemble serpents. (c) Same as Trumpetwood. (d) A tropical American
shrub (Plumieria rubra) which has very fragrant red blossoms. (e) Same
as Letterwood.

Snak"ish (?), a. Having the qualities or characteristics of a snake;
snaky.

Snak"y (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a snake or snakes; resembling a
snake; serpentine; winding.

    The red light playing upon its gilt and carving gave it an
    appearance of snaky life.


L. Wallace.

2. Sly; cunning; insinuating; deceitful.

    So to the coast of Jordan he directs His easy steps, girded with
    snaky wiles.


Milton.

3. Covered with serpents; having serpents; as, a snaky rod or wand.
Dryden.

    That snaky-headed, Gorgon shield.


Milton.

Snap (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snapped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snapping.]
[LG. or D. snappen to snap up, to snatch; akin to G. schnappen, MHG.
snaben, Dan. snappe, and to D. snavel beak, bill. Cf. Neb, Snaffle, n.]
1. To break at once; to break short, as substances that are brittle.

    Breaks the doors open, snaps the locks.


Prior.

2. To strike, to hit, or to shut, with a sharp sound.

3. To bite or seize suddenly, especially with the teeth.

    He, by playing too often at the mouth of death, has been snapped by
    it at last.


South.

4. To break upon suddenly with sharp, angry words; to treat snappishly;
-- usually with up. Granville.

5. To crack; to cause to make a sharp, cracking noise; as, to snap a
whip.

    MacMorian snapped his fingers repeatedly.


Sir W. Scott.

6. To project with a snap.

To snap back (Football), to roll the ball back with the foot; -- done
only by the center rush, who thus delivers the ball to the quarter back
on his own side when both sides are ranged in line. -- To snap off. (a)
To break suddenly. (b) To bite off suddenly.

Snap, v. i. 1. To break short, or at once; to part asunder suddenly;
as, a mast snaps; a needle snaps.

    But this weapon will snap short, unfaithful to the hand that
    employs it.


Burke.

2. To give forth, or produce, a sharp, cracking noise; to crack; as,
blazing firewood snaps.

3. To make an effort to bite; to aim to seize with the teeth; to catch
eagerly (at anything); -- often with at; as, a dog snapsat a passenger;
a fish snaps at the bait.

4. To utter sharp, harsh, angry words; -- often with at; as, to snap at
a child.

5. To miss fire; as, the gun snapped.

Snap, n. [Cf. D. snap a snatching. See Snap, v. t.] 1. A sudden
breaking or rupture of any substance.

2. A sudden, eager bite; a sudden seizing, or effort to seize, as with
the teeth.

3. A sudden, sharp motion or blow, as with the finger sprung from the
thumb, or the thumb from the finger.

4. A sharp, abrupt sound, as that made by the crack of a whip; as, the
snap of the trigger of a gun.

5. A greedy fellow. L'Estrange.

6. That which is, or may be, snapped up; something bitten off, seized,
or obtained by a single quick movement; hence, a bite, morsel, or
fragment; a scrap.

    He's a nimble fellow, And alike skilled in every liberal science,
    As having certain snaps of all.


B. Jonson.

7. A sudden severe interval or spell; -- applied to the weather; as, a
cold snap. Lowell.

8. A small catch or fastening held or closed by means of a spring, or
one which closes with a snapping sound, as the catch of a bracelet,
necklace, clasp of a book, etc.

9. (Zoöl.) A snap beetle.

10. A thin, crisp cake, usually small, and flavored with ginger; --
used chiefly in the plural.

11. Briskness; vigor; energy; decision. [Colloq.]

12. Any circumstance out of which money may be made or an advantage
gained. [Slang]

Snap back (Football), the act of snapping back the ball. -- Snap
beetle, or Snap bug (Zoöl.), any beetle of the family Elateridæ, which,
when laid on its back, is able to leap to a considerable height by
means of a thoracic spring; -- called also snapping beetle. -- Snap
flask (Molding), a flask for small work, having its sides separable and
held together by latches, so that the flask may be removed from around
the sand mold. -- Snap judgment, a judgment formed on the instant
without deliberation. -- Snap lock, a lock shutting with a catch or
snap. -- Snap riveting, riveting in which the rivets have snapheads
formed by a die or swaging tool. -- Snap shot, a quick offhand shot,
without deliberately taking aim.

Snap"drag`on (?), n. 1. (Bot.) (a) Any plant of the scrrophulariaceous
genus Antirrhinum, especially the cultivated A. majus, whose showy
flowers are fancifully likened to the face of a dragon. (b) A West
Indian herb (Ruellia tuberosa) with curiously shaped blue flowers.

2. A play in which raisins are snatched from a vessel containing
burning brandy, and eaten; also, that which is so eaten. See
Flapdragon. Swift.

Snape (?), v. t. (Shipbuilding) To bevel the end of a timber to fit
against an inclined surface.

Snap"hance` (?), n. [D. snaphaan a gun, originally, the snapping cock
of a gun. See Snap, and Hen.] 1. A spring lock for discharging a
firearm; also, the firearm to which it is attached. [Obs.]

2. A trifling or second-rate thing or person. [Obs.]

Snap"head` (?), n. A hemispherical or rounded head to a rivet or bolt;
also, a swaging tool with a cavity in its face for forming such a
rounded head.

Snap"per (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, snaps; as, a snapper up of
trifles; the snapper of a whip.

2. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of large sparoid food fishes of
the genus Lutjanus, abundant on the southern coasts of the United
States and on both coasts of tropical America.

The red snapper (Lutjanus aya, or Blackfordi) and the gray, or
mangrove, snapper (L. griseus) are large and abundant species. The name
is loosely applied to various other fishes, as the bluefish, the
rosefish, the red grouper, etc. See Rosefish.

3. (Zoöl.) A snapping turtle; as, the alligator snapper.

4. (Zoöl.) The green woodpecker, or yaffle.

5. (Zoöl.) A snap beetle.

Snap"ping (?), a. & n. from Snap, v.

Snapping beetle. (Zoöl.) See Snap beetle, under Snap. -- Snapping
turtle. (Zoöl.) (a) A large and voracious aquatic turtle (Chelydra
serpentina) common in the fresh waters of the United States; -- so
called from its habit of seizing its prey by a snap of its jaws. Called
also mud turtle. (b) See Alligator snapper, under Alligator.

Snap"pish (?), a. 1. Apt to snap at persons or things; eager to bite;
as, a snapping cur.

2. Sharp in reply; apt to speak angrily or testily; easily provoked;
tart; peevish.

    The taunting address of a snappish misanthrope.


Jeffrey.

-- Snap"pish*ly, adv. -- Snap"pish*ness, n.

Snap"py (?), a. Snappish. [Colloq.]

Snap"sack` (?), n. [Cf. Sw. snappsäck, G. schnappsack.] A knapsack.
[Obs.] South.

Snap"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) See Impatiens.

Snar (?), v. i. [Akin to LG. & OD. snarren, G. schnarren, E. snore. See
Snore, and cf. Snarl to growl.] To snarl. [Obs.] Spenser.

Snare (?), n. [AS. sneara cord, a string; akin to D. snoer, G. schnur,
OHG. snour a cord, snarahha a noose, Dan. snare, Sw. & Icel. snara,
Goth. sn&?;rj&?; a basket; and probably also to E. needle. See Needle,
and cf. Snarl to entangle.] 1. A contrivance, often consisting of a
noose of cord, or the like, by which a bird or other animal may be
entangled and caught; a trap; a gin.

2. Hence, anything by which one is entangled and brought into trouble.

    If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed, Stands with the snares
    of war to tangle thee.


Shak.

3. The gut or string stretched across the lower head of a drum.

4. (Med.) An instrument, consisting usually of a wireloop or noose, for
removing tumors, etc., by avulsion.

Snare drum, the smaller common military drum, as distinguished from the
bass drum; -- so called because (in order to render it more resonant)
it has stretched across its lower head a catgut string or strings.

Snare, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snared (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snaring.] To
catch with a snare; to insnare; to entangle; hence, to bring into
unexpected evil, perplexity, or danger.

    Lest that too heavenly form . . . snare them.


Milton.

    The mournful crocodile With sorrow snares relenting passengers.


Shak.

Snar"er (?), n. One who lays snares, or entraps.

Snarl (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snarled (?); p. pr. & vvb. n. Snarling.]
[Etymol. uncertain.] To form raised work upon the outer surface of
(thin metal ware) by the repercussion of a snarling iron upon the inner
surface.

Snarl, v. t. [From Snare, v. t.] 1. To entangle; to complicate; to
involve in knots; as, to snarl a skein of thread. "Her snarled hair."
Spenser.

2. To embarrass; to insnare.

    [The] question that they would have snarled him with.


Latimer.

Snarl, n. A knot or complication of hair, thread, or the like,
difficult to disentangle; entanglement; hence, intricate complication;
embarrassing difficulty.

Snarl, v. i. [From Snar.] 1. To growl, as an angry or surly dog; to
gnarl; to utter grumbling sounds. "An angry cur snarls while he feeds."
Dryden & Lee.

2. To speak crossly; to talk in rude, surly terms.

    It is malicious and unmanly to snarl at the little lapses of a pen,
    from which Virgil himself stands not exempted.


Dryden.

Snarl, n. The act of snarling; a growl; a surly or peevish expression;
an angry contention.

Snarl"er (?), n. One who snarls; a surly, growling animal; a grumbling,
quarrelsome fellow.

Snarl"er, n. One who makes use of a snarling iron.

Snarl"ing, a. & n. from Snarl, v.

Snarling iron, a tool with a long beak, used in the process of
snarling. When one end is held in a vise, and the shank is struck with
a hammer, the repercussion of the other end, or beak, within the
article worked upon gives the requisite blow for producing raised work.
See 1st Snarl.

Snar"y (?), a. [From Snare.] Resembling, or consisting of, snares;
entangling; insidious.

    Spiders in the vault their snary webs have spread.


Dryden.

Snast (?), n. [Cf. Snite, v. t.] The snuff, or burnt wick, of a candle.
[Obs.] Bacon.

Snatch (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snatched (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Snatching.] [OE. snachen, snechen; akin to D. snakken to gasp, to long
(for), to desire. Cf. Snack, n., Sneck.] 1. To take or seize hastily,
abruptly, or without permission or ceremony; as, to snatch a loaf or a
kiss.

    When half our knowledge we must snatch, not take.


Pope.

2. To seize and transport away; to rap. "Snatch me to heaven." Thomson.

Syn. -- To twitch; pluck; grab; catch; grasp; gripe.

Snatch, v. i. To attempt to seize something suddenly; to catch; --
often with at; as, to snatch at a rope.

<! p. 1362 !>

Snatch (?), n. 1. A hasty catching or seizing; a grab; a catching at,
or attempt to seize, suddenly.

2. A short period of vigorous action; as, a snatch at weeding after a
shower. Tusser.

    They move by fits and snatches.


Bp. Wilkins.

3. A small piece, fragment, or quantity; a broken part; a scrap.

    We have often little snatches of sunshine.


Spectator.

    Leave me your snatches, and yield me a direct answer.


Shak.

Snatch block (Naut.), a kind of block with an opening in one side to
receive the bight of a rope.

Snatch"er (?), n. One who snatches, or takes abruptly.

Snatch"ing*ly, adv. By snatching; abruptly.

Snath (snth), n. [Cf. AS. snðan to cut, to mow, snd a bite, bit, snip.]
The handle of a scythe; a snead. [Variously written in England snead,
sneed, sneath, sneeth, snathe, etc.; in Scotland written sned.]

Snathe (sn), v. t. [Cf. Icel. sneiða to cut into alices, snða to cut;
akin to AS. besndan, snðan, G. schneiden, OHG. sndan, Goth. sneiþan to
cut, to reap, and E. snath, snithe.] To lop; to prune. [Prov. Eng.]

Snat"tock (snt"tk), n. [See Snathe.] A chip; a slice. [Prov. Eng.]
Gayton.

Snaw (sn), n. Snow. [Obs. or Scot.] Burns.

Snead (snd), n. [See Snath.] 1. A snath.

2. A line or cord; a string. [Prov. Eng.]

Sneak (snk), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sneaked (snkt); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sneaking.] [OE. sniken, AS. sncan to creep; akin to Dan. snige sig; cf.
Icel. snkja to hanker after.] 1. To creep or steal (away or about)
privately; to come or go meanly, as a person afraid or ashamed to be
seen; as, to sneak away from company.

    You skulked behind the fence, and sneaked away.


Dryden.

2. To act in a stealthy and cowardly manner; to behave with meanness
and servility; to crouch.

Sneak, v. t. To hide, esp. in a mean or cowardly manner. [Obs.]
"[Slander] sneaks its head." Wake.

Sneak, n. 1. A mean, sneaking fellow.

    A set of simpletons and superstitious sneaks.


Glanvill.

2. (Cricket) A ball bowled so as to roll along the ground; -- called
also grub. [Cant] R. A. Proctor.

Sneak"-cup` (?), n. One who sneaks from his cups; one who balks his
glass. [Obs.] Shak.

Sneak"er (?), n. 1. One who sneaks. Lamb.

2. A vessel of drink. [Prov. Eng.]

    A sneaker of five gallons.


Spectator.

Sneak"i*ness (?), n. The quality of being sneaky.

Sneak"ing, a. Marked by cowardly concealment; deficient in openness and
courage; underhand; mean; crouching. -- Sneak"ing*ly, adv. --
Sneak"ing*ness, n.

Sneaks"by (?), n. A paltry fellow; a sneak. [Obs.] "Such a bashful
sneaksby." Barrow.

Sneak"y (?), n. Like a sneak; sneaking.

Sneap (?), v. t. [Cf. Icel. sneypa to dishonor, disgrace, chide, but
also E. snip, and snub.] 1. To check; to reprimand; to rebuke; to
chide. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

2. To nip; to blast; to blight. [Obs.]

    Biron is like an envious, sneaping frost.


Shak.

Sneap, n. A reprimand; a rebuke. [Obs.]

    My lord, I will not undergo this sneap without reply.


Shak.

{ Sneath (?), Sneathe (?) }, n. See Snath.

Sneb (?), v. t. [See Snib.] To reprimand; to sneap. [Obs.] "Scold and
sneb the good oak." Spenser.

Sneck (?), v. t. [See Snatch.] To fasten by a hatch; to latch, as a
door. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

Sneck up, be silent; shut up; hold your peace. Shak.

Sneck, n. A door latch. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

Sneck band, a latchstring. Burns. -- Sneck drawer, a latch lifter; a
bolt drawer; hence, a sly person; a cozener; a cheat; -- called also
sneckdraw. -- Sneck drawing, lifting the latch.

Sneck"et (?), n. A door latch, or sneck. [Prov. Eng.]

Sned (?), v. t. To lop; to snathe. [Prov. Eng.]

{ Sned (?), Sneed (?) }, n. See Snath.

Sneer (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sneered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sneering.]
[OE. sneren, Dan. sn&?;rre to snarl or grin (like a dog); cf. Prov. E.
sneer to grin, sner to snort, snert to sneer at. See Snore, v. i.] 1.
To show contempt by turning up the nose, or by a particular facial
expression.

2. To inssinuate contempt by a covert expression; to speak derisively.

    I could be content to be a little sneared at.


Pope.

3. To show mirth awkwardly. [R.] Tatler.

Syn. -- To scoff; gibe; jeer. -- Sneer, Scoff, Jeer. The verb to sneer
implies to cast contempt indirectly or by covert expressions. To jeer
is stronger, and denotes the use of several sarcastic reflections. To
scoff is stronger still, implying the use of insolent mockery and
derision.

    And sneers as learnedly as they, Like females o'er their morning
    tea.


Swift.

    Midas, exposed to all their jeers, Had lost his art, and kept his
    ears.


Swift.

    The fop, with learning at defiance, Scoffs at the pedant and
    science.


Gay.

Sneer, v. t. 1. To utter with a grimace or contemptuous expression; to
utter with a sneer; to say sneeringly; as, to sneer fulsome lies at a
person. Congreve.

    "A ship of fools," he sneered.


Tennyson.

2. To treat with sneers; to affect or move by sneers.

    Nor sneered nor bribed from virtue into shame.


Savage.

Sneer, n. 1. The act of sneering.

2. A smile, grin, or contortion of the face, indicative of contempt; an
indirect expression or insinuation of contempt. "Who can refute a
sneer?" Raley.

Sneer"er (?), n. One who sneers.

Sneer"ful (?), a. Given to sneering. [Obs.]

Sneer"ing*ly, adv. In a sneering manner.

Sneeze (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sneezed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sneezing.]
[OE. snesen; of uncertain origin; cf. D. snuse to sniff, E. neese, and
AS. fneósan.] To emit air, chiefly through the nose, audibly and
violently, by a kind of involuntary convulsive force, occasioned by
irritation of the inner membrane of the nose.

Not to be sneezed at, not to be despised or contemned; not to be
treated lightly. [Colloq.] "He had to do with old women who were not to
be sneezed at." Prof. Wilson.

Sneeze, n. A sudden and violent ejection of air with an audible sound,
chiefly through the nose.

Sneeze"weed` (?), n. (Bot.) A yellow-flowered composite plant (Helenium
autumnale) the odor of which is said to cause sneezing.

Sneeze"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) The wood of a South African tree. See
Neishout.

Sneeze"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) A European herbaceous plant (Achillea
Ptarmica) allied to the yarrow, having a strong, pungent smell.

Sneez"ing, n. (Physiol.) The act of violently forcing air out through
the nasal passages while the cavity of the mouth is shut off from the
pharynx by the approximation of the soft palate and the base of the
tongue.

Snell (?), a. [AS. snell; akin to D. snel, G. schnell, OHG. snel, Icel.
snjallr valiant.] Active; brisk; nimble; quick; sharp. [Archaic or
Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

    That horny-handed, snell, peremptory little man.


Dr. J. Brown.

Snell, n. A short line of horsehair, gut, etc., by which a fishhook is
attached to a longer line.

Snet (?), n. [Cf. G. schnitt that which is cut, fr. schneiden to cut,
E. snath.] The fat of a deer. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Snet, v. t. [See Snot.] The clear of mucus; to blow. [Obs.] "Snetting
his nose." Holland.

Snew (?), v. i. To snow; to abound. [Obs.]

    It snewed in his house of meat and drink.


Chaucer.

Snib (?), v. t. [OE. snibben; cf. Dan. snibbe, and E. snub, v. t.] To
check; to sneap; to sneb. [Obs.]

    Him would he snib sharply for the nones.


Chaucer.

Snib, n. A reprimand; a snub. [Obs.] Marston.

Snick (?), n. [Prov. E. snick a notch; cf. Icel. snikka nick, cut.] 1.
A small cut or mark.

2. (Cricket) A slight hit or tip of the ball, often unintentional.

3. (Fiber) A knot or irregularity in yarn. Knight.

4. (Furriery) A snip or cut, as in the hair of a beast.

Snick and snee [cf. D. snee, snede, a cut], a combat with knives.
[Obs.] Wiseman.

Snick, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snicked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snicking.] 1.
To cut slightly; to strike, or strike off, as by cutting. H. Kingsley.

2. (Cricket) To hit (a ball) lightly. R. A. Proctor.

Snick, n. & v. t. See Sneck. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Snick up, shut up; silenced. See Sneck up, under Sneck.

    Give him money, George, and let him go snick up.


Beau. & Fl.

Snick"er (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snickered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Snickering.] [Cf. D. snikken to sob, to sigh.] [Written also snigger.]
1. To laugh slyly; to laugh in one's sleeve.

2. To laugh with audible catches of voice, as when persons attempt to
suppress loud laughter.

Snick"er, n. A half suppressed, broken laugh. [Written also snigger.]

Snide (?), a. Tricky; deceptive; contemptible; as, a snide lawyer;
snide goods. [Slang]

Sniff (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sniffed (?) or Snift; p. pr. & vb. n.
Sniffing.] [OE. sneven; akin to snivel, snuff; cf. Dan. snive to sniff.
See Snuff, v. t.] To draw air audibly up the nose; to snuff; --
sometimes done as a gesture of suspicion, offense, or contempt.

    So ye grow squeamish, gods, and sniff at heaven.


M. Arnold.

Sniff, v. t. 1. To draw in with the breath through the nose; as, to
sniff the air of the country.

2. To perceive as by sniffing; to snuff, to scent; to smell; as, to
sniff danger.

Sniff, n. The act of sniffing; perception by sniffing; that which is
taken by sniffing; as, a sniff of air.

Sniff"ing, n. (Physiol.) A rapid inspiratory act, in which the mouth is
kept shut and the air drawn in through the nose.

Snif"fle (?), v. i. [Freq. of sniff. See Snivel.] To snuffle, as one
does with a catarrh. [Prov. Eng.]

Snift (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snifted; p. pr. & vb. n. Snifting.]
[From Sniff.] 1. To snort. [Obs.] "Resentment expressed by snifting."
Johnson.

2. To sniff; to snuff; to smell.

    It now appears that they were still snifing and hankering after
    their old quarters.


Landor.

Snift, n. 1. A moment. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

2. Slight snow; sleet. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Snift"ing, a. & n. from Snift.

Snifting valve, a small valve opening into the atmosphere from the
cylinder or condenser of a steam engine, to allow the escape of air
when the piston makes a stroke; -- so called from the noise made by its
action.

Snig (?), v. t. [See Snick a small cut.] To chop off; to cut. [Prov.
Eng.]

Snig, v. i. [See Sneak.] To sneak. [Prov. Eng.]

{ Snig, Snigg, } n. [Cf. Sneak.] (Zoöl.) A small eel. [Prov. Eng.]

Snig"ger (?), v. i. See Snicker. Thackeray.

Snig"ger, n. See Snicker. Dickens.

Snig"gle (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sniggled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sniggling(?).] [See Snig a kind of eel.] To fish for eels by thrusting
the baited hook into their holes or hiding places. Walton.

Snig"gle, v. t. To catch, as an eel, by sniggling; hence, to hook; to
insnare. Beau. & Fl.

Snip (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snipped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snipping.]
[D. snippen; akin to G. schnippen.] To cut off the nip or neb of, or to
cut off at once with shears or scissors; to clip off suddenly; to nip;
hence, to break off; to snatch away.

    Curbed and snipped in my younger years by fear of my parents from
    those vicious excrescences to which that age was subject.


Fuller.

    The captain seldom ordered anything out of the ship's stores . . .
    but I snipped some of it for my own share.


De Foe.

Snip (?), n. 1. A single cut, as with shears or scissors; a clip. Shak.

2. A small shred; a bit cut off. Wiseman.

3. A share; a snack. [Obs.] L'Estrange

4. A tailor. [Slang] Nares. C. Kingsley.

5. Small hand shears for cutting sheet metal.

Snipe (?), n. [OE. snipe; akin to D. snep, snip, LG. sneppe, snippe, G.
schnepfe, Icel. snpa (in comp.), Dan. sneppe, Sw. snäppa a sanpiper,
and possibly to E. snap. See Snap, Snaffle.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of
numerous species of limicoline game birds of the family Scolopacidæ,
having a long, slender, nearly straight beak.

The common, or whole, snipe (Gallinago cœlestis) and the great, or
double, snipe (G. major), are the most important European species. The
Wilson's snipe (G. delicata) (sometimes erroneously called English
snipe) and the gray snipe, or dowitcher (Macrohamphus griseus), are
well- known American species.

2. A fool; a blockhead. [R.] Shak.

Half snipe, the dunlin; the jacksnipe. - - Jack snipe. See Jacksnipe.
-- Quail snipe. See under Quail. -- Robin snipe, the knot. -- Sea
snipe. See in the Vocabulary. -- Shore snipe, any sandpiper. -- Snipe
hawk, the marsh harrier. [Prov. Eng.] -- Stone snipe, the tattler. --
Summer snipe, the dunlin; the green and the common European sandpipers.
-- Winter snipe. See Rock snipe, under Rock. -- Woodcock snipe, the
great snipe.

Snipe"bill` (?), n. 1. A plane for cutting deep grooves in moldings.

2. A bolt by which the body of a cart is fastened to the axle. [Local,
U.S.]

Snipe"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The bellows fish. (b) A long, slender
deep-sea fish (Nemichthys scolopaceus) with a slender beak.

Snip"pack (?), n. [Cf. Snipe.] (Zoöl.) The common snipe. [Prov. Eng.]

Snip"per (?), n. One who snips.

Snip"per-snap`er (?), n. A small, insignificant fellow. [Colloq.]

Snip"pet (?), n. A small part or piece.

    To be cut into snippets and shreds.


F. Harrison.

Snip"pet*y (?), a. Ridiculously small; petty. "Snippety facts." London
Spectator.

Snip"-snap` (?), n. [Reduplication of snap.] A tart dialogue with quick
replies. [R.] Pope.

Snip"-snap`, a. Quick; short; sharp; smart. Shak.

Snip"y (snp"), a. Like a snipe.

Snite (snt), n. A snipe. [Obs. or Scot.] Carew.

Snite, v. t. [Icel. snfa. See Snout.] To blow, as the nose; to snuff,
as a candle. [Obs. or Scot.]

{ Snithe (?), Snith"y (?) }, a. [AS. snðan to cut. See Snathe.] Sharp;
piercing; cutting; -- applied to the wind. [Prov. Eng.]

Sniv"el (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sniveled (?) or Snivelled; p. pr. &
vb. n. Sniveling or Snivelling.] [OE. snivelen, snevelen, snuvelen,
freg. of sneven. See Sniff, and cf. Snuffle.] 1. To run at the nose; to
make a snuffling noise.

2. To cry or whine with snuffling, as children; to cry weakly or
whiningly.

    Put stop to thy sniveling ditty.


Sir W. Scott.

Sniv"el, n. [AS. snofel. Cf. Snivel, v. i.] Mucus from the nose; snot.

Sniv"el*er (?), n. [Written also sniveller.] One who snivels, esp. one
who snivels habitually.

Sniv"el*y (?), a. Running at the nose; sniveling pitiful; whining.

Snob (?), n. [Icel. snpr a dolt, impostor, charlatan. Cf. Snub.] 1. A
vulgar person who affects to be better, richer, or more fashionable,
than he really is; a vulgar upstart; one who apes his superiors.
Thackeray.

    Essentially vulgar, a snob. -- a gilded snob, but none the less a
    snob.


R. G. White.

2. (Eng. Univ.) A townsman. [Canf]

3. A journeyman shoemaker. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

4. A workman who accepts lower than the usual wages, or who refuses to
strike when his fellows do; a rat; a knobstick.

    Those who work for lower wages during a strike are called snobs,
    the men who stand out being "nobs"


De Quincey.

Snob"ber*y (?), n. The quality of being snobbish; snobbishness.

Snob"bish (?), a. Of or pertaining to a snob; characteristic of, or
befitting, a snob; vulgarly pretentious. -- Snob"bish*ly, adv.

Snob"bish*ness, n. Vulgar affectation or ostentation; mean admiration
of mean things; conduct or manners of a snob.

Snob"bism (?), n. Snobbery.

<! p. 1363 !>

Snob"by (snb"b), a. Snobbish. [R.] E. B. Ramsay.

Snob"ling, n. A little snob. [Jocose] Thackeray.

Snob*oc"ra*cy (snb*k"r*s), n. [Snob + -cracy, as in aristocracy,
mobocracy.] Snobs, collectively. [Hybrid & Recent] C. Kingsley.

Snod (snd), n. [See Snood.] A fillet; a headband; a snood. [Obs. or
Prov. Eng.]

Snod, a. [Scot. snod to prune, put in order.] Trimmed; smooth; neat;
trim; sly; cunning; demure. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Snoff (snf; 115), n. [Cf. Snuff.] (Mining) A short candle end used for
igniting a fuse. Raymond.

Snood (?), n. [AS. snd. Cf. Snare.] 1. The fillet which binds the hair
of a young unmarried woman, and is emblematic of her maiden character.
[Scot.]

    And seldom was a snood amid Such wild, luxuriant ringlets hid.


Sir W. Scott.

2. A short line (often of horsehair) connecting a fishing line with the
hook; a snell; a leader.

Snood, v. t. To bind or braid up, as the hair, with a snood. [Scot.]

Snood"ed, a. Wearing or having a snood. "The snooded daughter."
Whittier.

Snook (snk), v. i. [Prov. E. snook to search out, to follow by the
scent; cf. Sw. snoka to lurk, LG. snöggen, snuckern, snökern, to
snuffle, to smell about, to search for.] To lurk; to lie in ambush.
[Obs.]

Snook, n. [D. snoek.] (Zoöl.) (a) A large perchlike marine food fish
(Centropomus undecimalis) found both on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts
of tropical America; -- called also ravallia, and robalo. (b) The
cobia. (c) The garfish.

Snooze (snz), n. [Scot. snooze to sleep; cf. Dan. & Sw. snus snuff.] A
short sleep; a nap. [Colloq.]

Snooze, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snoozed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snoozing.] To
doze; to drowse; to take a short nap; to slumber. [Colloq.]

Snore (snr), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snored (snrd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Snoring.] [OE. snoren, AS. snora a snoring; akin to LG. snoren,
snorken, snurken, to snore, D. snorken, G. schnarchen to snore,
schnarren to rattle, MHG. snarren, Sw. snarka to snore, Icel. snarka to
sputter, fizzle. Cf. Snarl to growl, Sneer, Snort. See Snoring.] To
breathe with a rough, hoarse, nasal voice in sleep.

Snore, n. A harsh nasal noise made in sleep.

Snor"er (?), n. One who snores.

Snor"ing, n. (Physiol.) The act of respiring through the open mouth so
that the currents of inspired and expired air cause a vibration of the
uvula and soft palate, thus giving rise to a sound more or less harsh.
It is usually unvoluntary, but may be produced voluntarily.

Snort (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snorted; p. pr. & vb. n. Snorting.] [OE.
snorten; akin to snoren. See Snore.] 1. To force the air with violence
through the nose, so as to make a noise, as do high- spirited horsed in
prancing and play. Fairfax.

2. To snore. [R.] "The snorting citizens." Shak.

3. To laugh out loudly. [Colloq.] Halliwell.

Snort, n. The act of snorting; the sound produced in snorting.

Snort, v. t. To expel throught the nostrils with a snort; to utter with
a snort. Keats.

Snort"er (?), n. 1. One who snorts.

2. (Zoöl.) The wheather; -- so called from its cry. [Prov. Eng.]

Snot (?), n. [AS. snot; akin to D. snot, LG. snotte, Dan. snot, and to
E. snout. See Snout.] 1. Mucus secreted in, or discharged from, the
nose. [Low]

2. A mean, insignificant fellow. [Low]

Snot, v. t. To blow, wipe, or clear, as the nose.

Snot"ter (?), v. i. [From Snot.] To snivel; to cry or whine. [Prov.
Eng.] Grose.

Snot"ter, n. [Etymol. uncertain.] (Naut.) A rope going over a yardarm,
used to bend a tripping line to, in sending down topgallant and royal
yards in vessels of war; also, the short line supporting the heel of
the sprit in a small boat.

Snot"ter*y (?), n. Filth; abomination. [Obs.]

    To purge the snottery of our slimy time.


Marston.

Snot"ty (?), a. Foul with snot; hence, mean; dirty.

-- Snot"ti*ly (#), adv. -- Snot"ti*ness, n.

Snout (snout), n. [OE. snoute, probably of Scand, or Low German origin;
cf. LG. snute, D. snuit, G. schnauze, Sw. snut, snyte, Dan. snude,
Icel. sn&?;ta to blow the nose; probably akin to E. snuff, v.t. Cf.
Snite, Snot, Snuff.] 1. The long, projecting nose of a beast, as of
swine.

2. The nose of a man; -- in contempt. Hudibras.

3. The nozzle of a pipe, hose, etc.

4. (Zoöl.) (a) The anterior prolongation of the head of a gastropod; --
called also rostrum. (b) The anterior prolongation of the head of
weevils and allied beetles.

Snout beetle (Zoöl.), any one of many species of beetles having an
elongated snout and belonging to the tribe Rhynchophora; a weevil. --
Snout moth (Zoöl.), any pyralid moth. See Pyralid.

Snout, v. t. To furnish with a nozzle or point.

Snout"y (?), a. Resembling a beast's snout.

    The nose was ugly, long, and big, Broad and snouty like a pig.


Otway.

Snow (?), n. [LG. snaue, or D. snaauw, from LG. snau a snout, a beak.]
(Naut.) A square-rigged vessel, differing from a brig only in that she
has a trysail mast close abaft the mainmast, on which a large trysail
is hoisted.

Snow, n. [OE. snow, snaw, AS. snw; akin to D. sneeuw, OS. & OHG. sno,
G. schnee, Icel. snær, snjr, snajr, Sw. snö, Dan. snee, Goth. snaiws,
Lith. snëgas, Russ. snieg', Ir. & Gael. sneachd, W. nyf, L. nix, nivis,
Gr. acc. ni`fa, also AS. snwan to snow, G. schneien, OHG. snwan, Lith.
snigti, L. ningit it snows, Gr. ni`fei, Zend snizh to snow; cf. Skr.
snih to be wet or sticky. &radic;172.] 1. Watery particles congealed
into white or transparent crystals or flakes in the air, and falling to
the earth, exhibiting a great variety of very beautiful and perfect
forms.

Snow is often used to form compounds, most of which are of obvious
meaning; as, snow-capped, snow-clad, snow-cold, snow-crowned,
snow-crust, snow- fed, snow-haired, snowlike, snow-mantled,
snow-nodding, snow-wrought, and the like.

2. Fig.: Something white like snow, as the white color (argent) in
heraldry; something which falls in, or as in, flakes.

    The field of snow with eagle of black therein.


Chaucer.

Red snow. See under Red.

Snow bunting. (Zoöl.) See Snowbird, 1. -- Snow cock (Zoöl.), the snow
pheasant. -- Snow flea (Zoöl.), a small black leaping poduran
(Achorutes nivicola) often found in winter on the snow in vast numbers.
-- Snow flood, a flood from melted snow. -- Snow flower (Bot.), the
fringe tree. -- Snow fly, or Snow insect (Zoöl.), any one of several
species of neuropterous insects of the genus Boreus. The male has
rudimentary wings; the female is wingless. These insects sometimes
appear creeping and leaping on the snow in great numbers. -- Snow gnat
(Zoöl.), any wingless dipterous insect of the genus Chionea found
running on snow in winter. -- Snow goose (Zoöl.), any one of several
species of arctic geese of the genus Chen. The common snow goose (Chen
hyperborea), common in the Western United States in winter, is white,
with the tips of the wings black and legs and bill red. Called also
white brant, wavey, and Texas goose. The blue, or blue-winged, snow
goose (C. cœrulescens) is varied with grayish brown and bluish gray,
with the wing quills black and the head and upper part of the neck
white. Called also white head, white-headed goose, and bald brant. --
Snow leopard (Zool.), the ounce. -- Snow line, lowest limit of
perpetual snow. In the Alps this is at an altitude of 9,000 feet, in
the Andes, at the equator, 16,000 feet. -- Snow mouse (Zoöl.), a
European vole (Arvicola nivalis) which inhabits the Alps and other high
mountains. -- Snow pheasant (Zoöl.), any one of several species of
large, handsome gallinaceous birds of the genus Tetraogallus, native of
the lofty mountains of Asia. The Himalayn snow pheasant (T.
Himalayensis) in the best-known species. Called also snow cock, and
snow chukor. -- Snow partridge. (Zoöl.) See under Partridge. -- Snow
pigeon (Zoöl.), a pigeon (Columba leuconota) native of the Himalaya
mountains. Its back, neck, and rump are white, the top of the head and
the ear coverts are black. -- Snow plant (Bot.), a fleshy parasitic
herb (Sarcodes sanguinea) growing in the coniferous forests of
California. It is all of a bright red color, and is fabled to grow from
the snow, through which it sometimes shoots up.

Snow (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snowed (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n. Snowing.]
To fall in or as snow; -- chiefly used impersonally; as, it snows; it
snowed yesterday.

Snow, v. t. To scatter like snow; to cover with, or as with, snow.
Donne. Shak.

Snow"ball` (?), n. 1. A round mass of snow pressed or roller together,
or anything resembling such a mass.

2. (Bot.) The Guelder-rose.

Snowball tree (Bot.), the Guelder- rose.

Snow"ball`, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snowballed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Snowballing.] To pelt with snowballs; to throw snowballs at.

Snow"ball`, v. i. To throw snowballs.

Snow"ber`ry (?), n. (Bot.) A name of several shrubs with white berries;
as, the Symphoricarpus racemosus of the Northern United States, and the
Chiococca racemosa of Florida and tropical America.

Creeping snowberry. (Bot.) See under Creeping.

Snow"bird (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) An arctic finch (Plectrophenax, or
Plectrophanes, nivalis) common, in winter, both in Europe and the
United States, and often appearing in large flocks during snowstorms.
It is partially white, but variously marked with chestnut and brown.
Called also snow bunting, snowflake, snowfleck, and snowflight. (b) Any
finch of the genus Junco which appears in flocks in winter time,
especially J. hyemalis in the Eastern United States; -- called also
blue snowbird. See Junco. (c) The fieldfare. [Prov. Eng.]

Snow"-blind` (?), a. Affected with blindness by the brilliancy of snow.
-- Snow"- blind`ness, n.

Snow"-bound` (?), a. Enveloped in, or confined by, snow. Whittier.

Snow"-broth` (?), n. Snow and water mixed, or snow just melted; very
cold liquor. Shak.

Snow"cap` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A very small humming bird (Microchæra
albocoronata) native of New Grenada.

The feathers of the top of the head are white and snining, the body
blue black with a purple and bronzy luster. The name is applied also to
Microchæra parvirostris of Central America, which is similar in color.

Snow"-capped` (?), a. Having the top capped or covered with snow; as,
snow-capped mountains.

Snow"drift` (?), n. A bank of drifted snow.

Snow"drop` (?), n. (Bot.) A bulbous plant (Galanthus nivalis) bearing
white flowers, which often appear while the snow is on the ground. It
is cultivated in gardens for its beauty.

Snowdrop tree. See Silver-bell tree, under Silver, a.

Snow"flake` (?), n. 1. A flake, or small filmy mass, of snow.

2. (Zoöl.) See Snowbird, 1.

3. (Bot.) A name given to several bulbous plants of the genus Leucoium
(L. vernum, æstivum, etc.) resembling the snowdrop, but having all the
perianth leaves of equal size.

Snow"fleck` (?), n. (Zoöl.) See Snowbird, 1.

Snowl (?), n. (Zoöl.) The hooded merganser. [Local, U.S.]

Snow"less (?), a. Destitute of snow.

{ Snow"plow`, Snow"plough` } (?), n. An implement operating like a
plow, but on a larger scale, for clearing away the snow from roads,
railways, etc.

Snow"shed (?), n. A shelter to protect from snow, esp. a long roof over
an exposed part of a railroad.

Snow"shoe` (?), n. A slight frame of wood three or four feet long and
about one third as wide, with thongs or cords stretched across it, and
having a support and holder for the foot; -- used by persons for
walking on soft snow.

Snow"shoe`ing, n. Traveling on snowshoes.

Snow"sho`er (?), n. One who travels on snowshoes; an expert in using
snowshoes. W. G. Beers.

Snow"slip` (?), n. A large mass or avalanche of snow which slips down
the side of a mountain, etc.

Snow"storm` (?), n. A storm with falling snow.

Snow"-white` (?), a. White as snow; very white. "Snow-white and
rose-red" Chaucer.

Snow"y (?), a. 1. White like snow. "So shows a snowy dove trooping with
crows." Shak.

2. Abounding with snow; covered with snow. "The snowy top of cold
Olympus." Milton.

3. Fig.: Pure; unblemished; unstained; spotless.

    There did he lose his snowy innocence.


J. Hall (1646).

Snowy heron (Zoöl.), a white heron, or egret (Ardea candidissima),
found in the Southern United States, and southward to Chili; -- called
also plume bird. -- Snowy lemming (Zoöl.), the collared lemming
(Cuniculus torquatus), which turns white in winter. -- Snowy owl
(Zoöl.), a large arctic owl (Nyctea Scandiaca, or N. nivea) common all
over the northern parts of the United States and Europe in winter time.
Its plumage is sometimes nearly pure white, but it is usually more or
less marked with blackish spots. Called also white owl. -- Snowy plover
(Zoöl.), a small plover (Ægialitis nivosa) of the western parts of the
United States and Mexico. It is light gray above, with the under parts
and portions of the head white.

Snub (?), v. i. [Cf. D. snuiven to snort, to pant, G. schnauben, MHG.
snben, Prov. G. schnupfen, to sob, and E. snuff, v.t.] To sob with
convulsions. [Obs.] Bailey.

Snub, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snubbed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snubbing.] [Cf.
Icel. ssnubba to snub, chide, Sw. snubba, Icel. snubbttr snubbed,
nipped, and E. snib.] 1. To clip or break off the end of; to check or
stunt the growth of; to nop.

2. To check, stop, or rebuke, with a tart, sarcastic reply or remark;
to reprimand; to check. J. Foster.

3. To treat with contempt or neglect, as a forward or pretentious
person; to slight designedly.

To snub a cable or rope (Naut.), to check it suddenly in running out.
Totten.

Snub, n. 1. A knot; a protuberance; a song. [Obs.]

    [A club] with ragged snubs and knotty grain.


Spenser.

2. A check or rebuke; an intended slight. J. Foster.

Snub nose, a short or flat nose. -- Snub post, or Snubbing post
(Naut.), a post on a dock or shore, around which a rope is thrown to
check the motion of a vessel.

Snub"-nosed` (?), a. Having a short, flat nose, slightly turned up; as,
the snub-nosed eel.

Snub-nosed cachalot (Zoöl.), the pygmy sperm whale.

Snudge (?), v. i. [Cf. Snug.] To lie snug or quiet. [Obs.] Herbert.

Snudge, n. A miser; a sneaking fellow. [Obs.]

Snuff (?), n. [Cf. G. schnuppe candle snuff, schnuppen to snuff a
candle (see Snuff, v. t., to snuff a candle), or cf. Snub, v. t.] The
part of a candle wick charred by the flame, whether burning or not.

    If the burning snuff happens to get out of the snuffers, you have a
    chance that it may fall into a dish of soup.


Swift.

Snuff, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snuffed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snuffing.] [OE.
snuffen. See Snuff of a candle Snuff to sniff.] To crop the snuff of,
as a candle; to take off the end of the snuff of.

To snuff out, to extinguish by snuffing.

<! p. 1364 !>

Snuff (?), v. t.[Akin to D. snuffen, G. schnupfen, schnuppen, to snuff,
schnupfen a cold in the head, schnuppen to snuff (air), also, to snuff
(a candle). Cf. Sniff, Snout, Snub, v. i.] 1. To draw in, or to inhale,
forcibly through the nose; to sniff.

    He snuffs the wind, his heels the sand excite.


Dryden.

2. To perceive by the nose; to scent; to smell.

Snuff, v. i. 1. To inhale air through the nose with violence or with
noise, as do dogs and horses. Dryden.

2. To turn up the nose and inhale air, as an expression of contempt;
hence, to take offense.

    Do the enemies of the church rage and snuff?


Bp. Hall.

Snuff, n. 1. The act of snuffing; perception by snuffing; a sniff.

2. Pulverized tobacco, etc., prepared to be taken into the nose; also,
the amount taken at once.

3. Resentment, displeasure, or contempt, expressed by a snuffing of the
nose. [Obs.]

Snuff dipping. See Dipping, n., 5. -- Snuff taker, one who uses snuff
by inhaling it through the nose. -- To take it in snuff, to be angry or
offended. Shak. -- Up to snuff, not likely to be imposed upon; knowing;
acute. [Slang]

Snuff"box` (?), n. A small box for carrying snuff about the person.

Snuff"er (?), n. 1. One who snuffs.

2. (Zoöl.) The common porpoise.

Snuff"ers (?), n. pl. An instrument for cropping and holding the snuff
of a candle.

Snuff"ing*ly, adv. In a snuffing manner.

Snuf"fle (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snuffled(?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Snuffling (?).] [Freq. of snuff, v.i.; akin to LG. snuffeln, G.
schnüffeln, D. snuffeln, Dan. snövle. Cf. Sniffle.] To speak through
the nose; to breathe through the nose when it is obstructed, so as to
make a broken sound.

    One clad in purple Eats, and recites some lamentable rhyme . . .
    Snuffling at nose, and croaking in his throat.


Dryden.

Snuf"fle, n. 1. The act of snuffing; a sound made by the air passing
through the nose when obstructed.

    This dread sovereign, Breath, in its passage, gave a snort or
    snuffle.


Coleridge.

2. An affected nasal twang; hence, cant; hypocrisy.

3. pl. Obstruction of the nose by mucus; nasal catarrh of infants or
children. [Colloq.]

Snuf"fler (?), n. One who snuffles; one who uses cant.

Snuff"y (?), a. 1. Soiled with snuff.

2. Sulky; angry; vexed. [Obs. or Scot.] Jamieson.

Snug (?), a. [Compar. Snugger (?); superl. Snuggest (?).] [Prov. E.
snug tight, handsome; cf. Icel. snöggr smooth, ODan. snög neat, Sw.
snugg.] 1. Close and warm; as, an infant lies snug.

2. Close; concealed; not exposed to notice.

    Lie snug, and hear what critics say.


Swift.

3. Compact, convenient, and comfortable; as, a snug farm, house, or
property.

Snug, n. (Mach.) Same as Lug, n., 3.

Snug, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Snugged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Snugging(?).] To
lie close; to snuggle; to snudge; -- often with up, or together; as, a
child snugs up to its mother.

Snug, v. t. 1. To place snugly. [R.] Goldsmith.

2. To rub, as twine or rope, so as to make it smooth and improve the
finish.

Snug"ger*y (?), n.; pl. Snuggeries (&?;). A snug, cozy place. [Colloq.]
Dickens.

Snug"gle (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Snuggled (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Snuggling (?).] [Freq. of snug.] To move one way and the other so as to
get a close place; to lie close for comfort; to cuddle; to nestle.

Snug"ly, adv. In a snug manner; closely; safely.

Snug"ness, n. The quality or state of being snug.

Sny (?), n. [Cf. Icel. sna to turn.] An upward bend in a piece of
timber; the sheer of a vessel.

Sny"ing, n. (Naut.) A curved plank, placed edgewise, to work in the
bows of a vessel. R. H. Dana, Jr.

So (?), adv. [OE. so, sa, swa, AS. sw; akin to OFries, s, s&?;, D. zoo,
OS. & OHG. s&?;, G. so, Icel. sv, sv&?;, svo, so, Sw. s&?;, Dan. saa,
Goth. swa so, sw&?; as; cf. L. suus one's own, Skr. sva one's own,
one's self. &radic;192. Cf. As, Custom, Ethic, Idiom, Such.] 1. In that
manner or degree; as, indicated (in any way), or as implied, or as
supposed to be known.

    Why is his chariot so long in coming?


Judges v. 28.

2. In like manner or degree; in the same way; thus; for like reason;
whith equal reason; -- used correlatively, following as, to denote
comparison or resemblance; sometimes, also, following inasmuch as.

    As a war should be undertaken upon a just motive, so a prince ought
    to consider the condition he is in.


Swift.

3. In such manner; to such degree; -- used correlatively with as or
that following; as, he was so fortunate as to escape.

    I viewed in may mind, so far as I was able, the beginning and
    progress of a rising world.


T. Burnet.

    He is very much in Sir Roger's esteem, so that he lives in the
    family rather as a relation than dependent.


Addison.

4. Very; in a high degree; that is, in such a degree as can not well be
expressed; as, he is so good; he planned so wisely.

5. In the same manner; as has been stated or suggested; in this or that
condition or state; under these circumstances; in this way; -- with
reflex reference to something just asserted or implied; used also with
the verb to be, as a predicate.

    Use him [your tutor] with great respect yourself, and cause all
    your family to do so too.


Locke.

    It concerns every man, with the greatest seriousness, to inquire
    into those matters, whether they be so or not.


Tillotson.

    He is Sir Robert's son, and so art thou.


Shak.

6. The case being such; therefore; on this account; for this reason; on
these terms; -- used both as an adverb and a conjuction.

    God makes him in his own image an intellectual creature, and so
    capable of dominion.


Locke.

    Here, then, exchange we mutually forgiveness; So may the guilt of
    all my broken vows, My perjuries to thee, be all forgotten.


Rowe.

7. It is well; let it be as it is, or let it come to pass; -- used to
express assent.

    And when 't is writ, for my sake read it over, And if it please
    you, so; if not, why, so.


Shak.

    There is Percy; if your father will do me any honor, so; if not,
    let him kill the next Percy himself.


Shak.

8. Well; the fact being as stated; -- used as an expletive; as, so the
work is done, is it?

9. Is it thus? do you mean what you say? -- with an upward tone; as, do
you say he refuses? So? [Colloq.]

10. About the number, time, or quantity specified; thereabouts; more or
less; as, I will spend a week or so in the country; I have read only a
page or so.

    A week or so will probably reconcile us.


Gay.

See the Note under Ill, adv.

So . . . as. So is now commonly used as a demonstrative correlative of
as when it is the puprpose to emphasize the equality or comparison
suggested, esp. in negative assertions, and questions implying a
negative answer. By Shakespeare and others so . . . as was much used
where as . . . as is now common. See the Note under As, 1.

    So do, as thou hast said.


Gen. xviii. 5.

    As a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.


Ps. ciii. 15.

    Had woman been so strong as men.


Shak.

    No country suffered so much as England.


Macaulay.

-- So far, to that point or extent; in that particular. "The song was
moral, and so far was right." Cowper. -- So far forth, as far; to such
a degree. Shak. Bacon. -- So forth, further in the same or similar
manner; more of the same or a similar kind. See And so forth, under
And. -- So, so, well, well. "So, so, it works; now, mistress, sit you
fast." Dryden. Also, moderately or tolerably well; passably; as, he
succeeded but so so. "His leg is but so so." Shak. -- So that, to the
end that; in order that; with the effect or result that. -- So then,
thus then it is; therefore; the consequence is.

So (?), conj. Provided that; on condition that; in case that; if.

    Though all the winds of doctrine were let loose play upon the
    earth, so truth be in the field, we do injuriously, by licensing
    and prohibiting, to misdoubt her strength.


Milton.

So, interj. Be as you are; stand still; stop; that will do; right as
you are; -- a word used esp. to cows; also used by sailors.

Soak (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soaked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Soaking.]
[OE. soken, AS. socian to sioak, steep, fr. s&?;can, s&?;gan, to suck.
See Suck.] 1. To cause or suffer to lie in a fluid till the substance
has imbibed what it can contain; to macerate in water or other liquid;
to steep, as for the purpose of softening or freshening; as, to soak
cloth; to soak bread; to soak salt meat, salt fish, or the like.

2. To drench; to wet thoroughly.

    Their land shall be soaked with blood.


Isa. xxiv. 7.

3. To draw in by the pores, or through small passages; as, a sponge
soaks up water; the skin soaks in moisture.

4. To make (its way) by entering pores or interstices; -- often with
through.

    The rivulet beneath soaked its way obscurely through wreaths of
    snow.


Sir W. Scott.

5. Fig.: To absorb; to drain. [Obs.] Sir H. Wotton.

Soak, v. i. 1. To lie steeping in water or other liquid; to become
sturated; as, let the cloth lie and soak.

2. To enter (into something) by pores or interstices; as, water soaks
into the earth or other porous matter.

3. To drink intemperately or gluttonously. [Slang]

Soak"age (?), n. The act of soaking, or the state of being soaked;
also, the quantity that enters or issues by soaking.

Soak"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, soaks.

2. A hard drinker. [Slang] South.

Soak"ing, a. Wetting thoroughly; drenching; as, a soaking rain. --
Soak"ing*ly, adv.

Soak"y (?), a. Full of moisture; wet; soppy.

Soal (?), n. 1. The sole of a shoe. [Obs. or R.]

2. (Zoöl.) See Sole, the fish. [Obs.]

Soal, n. [AS. sol mire. Cf. Sully.] A dirty pond. [Prov. Eng.]
Halliwell.

Soam (?), n. A chain by which a leading horse draws a plow. Knight.

Soap (?), n. [OE. sope, AS. spe; akin to D. zeep, G. seife, OHG. seifa,
Icel. spa, Sw. s&?;pa, Dan. s&?;be, and perhaps to AS. span to drip,
MHG. sfen, and L. sebum tallow. Cf. Saponaceous.] A substance which
dissolves in water, thus forming a lather, and is used as a cleansing
agent. Soap is produced by combining fats or oils with alkalies or
alkaline earths, usually by boiling, and consists of salts of sodium,
potassium, etc., with the fatty acids (oleic, stearic, palmitic, etc.).
See the Note below, and cf. Saponification. By extension, any compound
of similar composition or properties, whether used as a cleaning agent
or not.

In general, soaps are of two classes, hard and soft. Calcium,
magnesium, lead, etc., form soaps, but they are insoluble and useless.

    The purifying action of soap depends upon the fact that it is
    decomposed by a large quantity of water into free alkali and an
    insoluble acid salt. The first of these takes away the fatty dirt
    on washing, and the latter forms the soap lather which envelops the
    greasy matter and thus tends to remove it.


Roscoe & Schorlemmer.

Castile soap, a fine-grained hard soap, white or mottled, made of olive
oil and soda; -- called also Marseilles, or Venetian, soap. -- Hard
soap, any one of a great variety of soaps, of different ingredients and
color, which are hard and compact. All solid soaps are of this class.
-- Lead soap, an insoluble, white, pliable soap made by saponifying an
oil (olive oil) with lead oxide; -- used externally in medicine. Called
also lead plaster, diachylon, etc. -- Marine soap. See under Marine. --
Pills of soap (Med.), pills containing soap and opium. -- Potash soap,
any soap made with potash, esp. the soft soaps, and a hard soap made
from potash and castor oil. -- Pumice soap, any hard soap charged with
a gritty powder, as silica, alumina, powdered pumice, etc., which
assists mechanically in the removal of dirt. -- Resin soap, a yellow
soap containing resin, -- used in bleaching. -- Silicated soap, a cheap
soap containing water glass (sodium silicate). -- Soap bark. (Bot.) See
Quillaia bark. -- Soap bubble, a hollow iridescent globe, formed by
blowing a film of soap suds from a pipe; figuratively, something
attractive, but extremely unsubstantial.

    This soap bubble of the metaphysicians.


J. C. Shairp.

-- Soap cerate, a cerate formed of soap, olive oil, white wax, and the
subacetate of lead, sometimes used as an application to allay
inflammation. -- Soap fat, the refuse fat of kitchens, slaughter
houses, etc., used in making soap. -- Soap liniment (Med.), a liniment
containing soap, camphor, and alcohol. -- Soap nut, the hard kernel or
seed of the fruit of the soapberry tree, -- used for making beads,
buttons, etc. -- Soap plant (Bot.), one of several plants used in the
place of soap, as the Chlorogalum pomeridianum, a California plant, the
bulb of which, when stripped of its husk and rubbed on wet clothes,
makes a thick lather, and smells not unlike new brown soap. It is
called also soap apple, soap bulb, and soap weed. -- Soap tree. (Bot.)
Same as Soapberry tree. -- Soda soap, a soap containing a sodium salt.
The soda soaps are all hard soaps. -- Soft soap, a soap of a gray or
brownish yellow color, and of a slimy, jellylike consistence, made from
potash or the lye from wood ashes. It is strongly alkaline and often
contains glycerin, and is used in scouring wood, in cleansing linen, in
dyehouses, etc. Figuratively, flattery; wheedling; blarney. [Colloq.]
-- Toilet soap, hard soap for the toilet, usually colored and perfumed.

Soap (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soaped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Soaping.] 1.
To rub or wash over with soap.

2. To flatter; to wheedle. [Slang]

Soap"ber`ry tree` (?). (Bot.) Any tree of the genus Sapindus, esp.
Sapindus saponaria, the fleshy part of whose fruit is used instead of
soap in washing linen; -- also called soap tree.

Soap"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any serranoid fish of the genus Rhypticus;
-- so called from the soapy feeling of its skin.

Soap"i*ness (?), n. Quality or state of being soapy.

Soap"root` (?), n. (Bot.) A perennial herb (Gypsophila Struthium) the
root of which is used in Spain as a substitute for soap.

Soap"stone` (?), n. See Steatite, and Talc.

Soap"suds` (?), n. pl. Suds made with soap.

Soap"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) A common plant (Saponaria officinalis) of the
Pink family; -- so called because its bruised leaves, when agitated in
water, produce a lather like that from soap. Called also Bouncing Bet.

Soap"y (?), a. [Compar. Soapier (?); superl. Soapiest.] 1. Resembling
soap; having the qualities of, or feeling like, soap; soft and smooth.

2. Smeared with soap; covered with soap.

Soar (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Soared (#); p. pr. & vb. n. Soaring.] [F.
s'essorer to soar, essorer to dry (by exposing to the air), fr. L. ex
out + aura the air, a breeze; akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?;.] 1. To fly
aloft, as a bird; to mount upward on wings, or as on wings. Chaucer.

    When soars Gaul's vulture with his wings unfurled.


Byron.

2. Fig.: To rise in thought, spirits, or imagination; to be exalted in
mood.

    Where the deep transported mind may soar.


Milton.

    Valor soars above What the world calls misfortune.


Addison.

Soar, n. The act of soaring; upward flight.

    This apparent soar of the hooded falcon.


Coleridge.

Soar, a. See 3d Sore. [Obs.]

Soar, a. See Sore, reddish brown.

Soar falcon. (Zoöl.) See Sore falcon, under Sore.

Soar"ing, a. & n. from Soar. -- Soar"ing*ly, adv.

||So*a"ve (?), a. [It.] (Mus.) Sweet.

||So*a`ve*men"te (?), adv. [It.] (Mus.) Sweetly.

Sob (?), v. t. [See Sop.] To soak. [Obs.] Mortimer.

Sob, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sobbed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sobbing.] [OE.
sobben; akin to AS. seófian, siófian, to complain, bewail, seófung,
siófung, sobbing, lamentation; cf. OHG. s&?;ftön, s&?;ft&?;n, to sigh,
MHG. siuften, siufzen, G. seufzen, MHG. s&?;ft a sigh, properly, a
drawing in of breath, from s&?;fen to drink, OHG. s&?;fan. Cf. Sup.] To
sigh with a sudden heaving of the breast, or with a kind of convulsive
motion; to sigh with tears, and with a convulsive drawing in of the
breath.

    Sobbing is the same thing [as sighing], stronger.


Bacon.

    She sighed, she sobbed, and, furious with despair. She rent her
    garments, and she tore her hair.


Dryden.

Sob, n. 1. The act of sobbing; a convulsive sigh, or inspiration of the
breath, as in sorrow.

    Break, heart, or choke with sobs my hated breath.


Dryden.

2. Any sorrowful cry or sound.

    The tremulous sob of the complaining owl.


Wordsworth.

Sob"bing (?), n. A series of short, convulsive inspirations, the
glottis being suddenly closed so that little or no air enters into the
lungs.

Sober (?), a. [Compar. Soberer (?); superl. Soberest.] [OE. sobre, F.
sobre, from L. sobrius, probably from a prefix so- expressing
separation + ebrius drunken. Cf. Ebriety.] 1. Temperate in the use of
spirituous liquors; habitually temperate; as, a sober man.

    That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, to
    the glory of Thy holy name.


Bk. of Com. Prayer.

2. Not intoxicated or excited by spirituous liquors; as, the sot may at
times be sober.

3. Not mad or insane; not wild, visionary, or heated with passion;
exercising cool, dispassionate reason; self- controlled;
self-possessed.

    There was not a sober person to be had; all was tempestuous and
    blustering.


Druden.

    No sober man would put himself into danger for the applause of
    escaping without breaking his neck.


Dryden.

<! p. 1365 !>

4. Not proceeding from, or attended with, passion; calm; as, sober
judgment; a man in his sober senses.

5. Serious or subdued in demeanor, habit, appearance, or color; solemn;
grave; sedate.

    What parts gay France from sober Spain?


Prior.

    See her sober over a sampler, or gay over a jointed baby.


Pope.

    Twilight gray Had in her sober livery all things clad.


Milton.

Syn. -- Grave; temperate; abstinent; abstemious; moderate; regular;
steady; calm; quiet; cool; collected; dispassionate; unimpassioned;
sedate; staid; serious; solemn; somber. See Grave.

So"ber (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sobered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sobering.]
To make sober.

    There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain, And drinking largely
    sobers us again.


Pope.

So"ber, v. i. To become sober; -- often with down.

    Vance gradually sobered down.


Ld. Lytton.

So"ber*ize (?), v. t. & i. To sober. [R.] Crabbe.

So"ber*ly, adv. In a sober manner; temperately; cooly; calmly; gravely;
seriously.

So"ber*ly, a. Grave; serious; solemn; sad. [Obs.]

    [He] looked hollow and thereto soberly.


Chaucer.

So"ber-mind`ed (?), a. Having a disposition or temper habitually sober.
-- So"ber- mind`ed*ness, n.

So"ber*ness, n. The quality or state of being sober.

Sob"o*les (?), n. [L., a short.] (Bot.) (a) A shoot running along under
ground, forming new plants at short distances. (b) A sucker, as of tree
or shrub.

Sob`o*lif"er*ous (?), a. [L. soboles + -ferous.] (Bot.) Producing
soboles. See Illust. of Houseleek.

So*bri"e*ty (?), n. [L. sobrietas: cf. F. sobriété. See Sober.] 1.
Habitual soberness or temperance as to the use of spirituous liquors;
as, a man of sobriety.

    Public sobriety is a relative duty.


Blackstone.

2. Habitual freedom from enthusiasm, inordinate passion, or overheated
imagination; calmness; coolness; gravity; seriousness; as, the sobriety
of riper years.

    Mirth makes them not mad, Nor sobriety sad.


Denham.

Syn. -- Soberness; temperance; abstinence; abstemiousness; moderation;
regularity; steadness; calmness; coolness; sober- mindeness;
sedateness; staidness; gravity; seriousness; solemnity.

||So`bri`quet" (s`br`k"), n.[F. sobriquet, OF. soubzbriquet,
||soubriquet, a chuck under the chin, hence, an affront, a nickname; of
||uncertain origin; cf. It. sottobecco a chuck under the chin.] An
||assumed name; a fanciful epithet or appellation; a nickname.
||[Sometimes less correctly written soubriquet.]

Soc (sk), n. [AS. sc the power of holding court, sway, domain,
properly, the right of investigating or seeking; akin to E. sake, seek.
Sake, Seek, and cf. Sac, and Soke.] [Written also sock, and soke.] 1.
(O. Eng. Law) (a) The lord's power or privilege of holding a court in a
district, as in manor or lordship; jurisdiction of causes, and the
limits of that jurisdiction. (b) Liberty or privilege of tenants
excused from customary burdens.

2. An exclusive privilege formerly claimed by millers of grinding all
the corn used within the manor or township which the mill stands.
[Eng.]

Soc and sac (O. Eng. Law), the full right of administering justice in a
manor or lordship.

Soc"age (?), n.[From Soc; cf. LL. socagium.] (O.Eng. Law) A tenure of
lands and tenements by a certain or determinate service; a tenure
distinct from chivalry or knight's service, in which the obligations
were uncertain. The service must be certain, in order to be denominated
socage, as to hold by fealty and twenty shillings rent. [Written also
soccage.]

Socage is of two kinds; free socage, where the services are not only
certain, but honorable; and villein socage, where the services, though
certain, are of a baser nature. Blackstone.

Soc"a*ger (?), n. (O. Eng. Law) A tennant by socage; a socman.

So"-called` (?), a. So named; called by such a name (but perhaps called
thus with doubtful propriety).

So`cia*bil"i*ty (?), n.[Cf. F. sociabilité.] The quality of being
sociable; sociableness.

So"cia*ble (?), a.[F., fr. L. sociabilis, fr. sociare to associate, fr.
socius a companion. See Social.] 1. Capable of being, or fit to be,
united in one body or company; associable. [R.]

    They are sociable parts united into one body.


Hooker.

2. Inclined to, or adapted for, society; ready to unite with others;
fond of companions; social.

    Society is no comfort to one not sociable.


Shak.

    What can be more uneasy to this sociable creature than the dry,
    pensive retirements of solitude?


South.

3. Ready to converse; inclined to talk with others; not taciturn or
reserved.

4. Affording opportunites for conversation; characterized by much
conversation; as, a sociable party.

5. No longer hostile; friendly. [Obs.] Beau. & Fl.

Sociable bird, or Sociable weaver (Zoöl.), a weaver bird which builds
composite nests. See Republican, n., 3. (b).

Syn. -- Social; companionable; conversible; friendly; familiar;
communicative; accessible.

So"cia*ble, n. 1. A gathering of people for social purposes; an
informal party or reception; as, a church sociable. [Colloq. U. S.]

2. A carriage having two double seats facing each other, and a box for
the driver. Miss Edgeworth.

So"cia*ble*ness, n. The quality of being sociable.

So"cia*bly, adv. In a sociable manner.

So"cial (?), a. [L. socialis, from socius a companion; akin to sequi to
follow: cf. F. social. See Sue to follow.] 1. Of or pertaining to
society; relating to men living in society, or to the public as an
aggregate body; as, social interest or concerns; social pleasure;
social benefits; social happiness; social duties. "Social phenomena."
J. S. Mill.

2. Ready or disposed to mix in friendly converse; companionable;
sociable; as, a social person.

3. Consisting in union or mutual intercourse.

    Best with thyself accompanied, seek'st not Social communication.


Milton.

4. (Bot.) Naturally growing in groups or masses; -- said of many
individual plants of the same species.

5. (Zoöl.) (a) Living in communities consisting of males, females, and
neuters, as do ants and most bees. (b) Forming compound groups or
colonies by budding from basal processes or stolons; as, the social
ascidians.

Social science, the science of all that relates to the social
condition, the relations and institutions which are involved in man's
existence and his well-being as a member of an organized community;
sociology. It concerns itself with questions of the public health,
education, labor, punishment of crime, reformation of criminals, and
the like. -- Social whale (Zoöl.), the blackfish. -- The social evil,
prostitution.

Syn. -- Sociable; companionable; conversible; friendly; familiar;
communicative; convival; festive.

So"cial*ism (?), n. [Cf. F. socialisme.] A theory or system of social
reform which contemplates a complete reconstruction of society, with a
more just and equitable distribution of property and labor. In popular
usage, the term is often employed to indicate any lawless,
revolutionary social scheme. See Communism, Fourierism, Saint-
Simonianism, forms of socialism.

    [Socialism] was first applied in England to Owen's theory of social
    reconstruction, and in France to those also of St. Simon and
    Fourier . . . The word, however, is used with a great variety of
    meaning, . . . even by economists and learned critics. The general
    tendency is to regard as socialistic any interference undertaken by
    society on behalf of the poor, . . . radical social reform which
    disturbs the present system of private property . . . The tendency
    of the present socialism is more and more to ally itself with the
    most advanced democracy.


Encyc. Brit.

    We certainly want a true history of socialism, meaning by that a
    history of every systematic attempt to provide a new social
    existence for the mass of the workers.


F. Harrison.

So"cial*ist, n. [Cf. F. socialiste.] One who advocates or practices the
doctrines of socialism.

{ So"cial*ist, So`cial*is"tic, } a. Pertaining to, or of the nature of,
socialism.

So`ci*al"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. socialisté, L. socialitas.] The quality
of being social; socialness.

So"cial*ize (?), v. t. 1. To render social.

2. To subject to, or regulate by, socialism.

So"cial*ly, adv. In a social manner; sociably.

So"cial*ness, n. The quality or state of being social.

So"ci*ate (?), a. [L. sociatus, p. p. of sociare to associate, fr.
socius companion.] Associated. [Obs.]

So"ci*ate, n. An associate. [Obs.]

    As for you, Dr. Reynolds, and your sociates.


Fuller.

So"ci*ate (?), v. i. To associate. [Obs.] Shelford.

So*ci`e*ta"ri*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to society; social.

    The all-sweeping besom of societarian reformation.


Lamb.

So*ci"e*ta*ry (?), a. Societarian. [R.]

So*ci"e*ty (?), n.; pl. Societies (#). [L. societas, fr. socius a
companion: cf. F. société. See Social.] 1. The relationship of men to
one another when associated in any way; companionship; fellowship;
company. "Her loved society." Milton.

    There is society where none intrudes By the deep sea, and music in
    its roar.


Byron.

2. Connection; participation; partnership. [R.]

    The meanest of the people and such as have the least society with
    the acts and crimes of kings.


Jer. Taylor.

3. A number of persons associated for any temporary or permanent
object; an association for mutual or joint usefulness, pleasure, or
profit; a social union; a partnership; as, a missionary society.

4. The persons, collectively considered, who live in any region or at
any period; any community of individuals who are united together by a
common bond of nearness or intercourse; those who recognize each other
as associates, friends, and acquaintances.

5. Specifically, the more cultivated portion of any community in its
social relations and influences; those who mutually give receive formal
entertainments.

Society of Jesus. See Jesuit. -- Society verses [a translation of F.
vers de société], the lightest kind of lyrical poetry; verses for the
amusement of polite society.

So*cin"i*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to Socinus, or the Socinians.

So*cin"i*an, n. One of the followers of Socinus; a believer in
Socinianism.

So*cin"i*an*ism (?), n. (Eccl. Hist.) The tenets or doctrines of
Faustus Socinus, an Italian theologian of the sixteenth century, who
denied the Trinity, the deity of Christ, the personality of the Devil,
the native and total depravity of man, the vicarious atonement, and the
eternity of future punishment. His theory was, that Christ was a man
divinely commissioned, who had no existence before he was conceived by
the Virgin Mary; that human sin was the imitation of Adam's sin, and
that human salvation was the imitation and adoption of Christ's virtue;
that the Bible was to be interpreted by human reason; and that its
language was metaphorical, and not to be taken literally.

So*cin"i*an*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Socinianized (?); p. pr. & vb.
n. Socinianizing (?).] To cause to conform to Socinianism; to regulate
by, or imbue with, the principles of Socinianism.

{ So`ci*o*log"ic (?), So`ci*o*log"ic*al (?) } a. Of or pertaining to
sociology, or social science. -- So`ci*o*log"ic*al*ly, adv.

So`ci*ol"o*gist (?), n. One who treats of, or devotes himself to, the
study of sociology. J. S. Mill.

So`ci*ol"o*gy (?), n. [L. socius a companion + -logy.] That branch of
philosophy which treats of the constitution, phenomena, and development
of human society; social science. H. Spencer.

Sock (?), n. [F. soc, LL. soccus, perhaps of Celtic origin.] A
plowshare. Edin. Encyc.

Sock, n. [OE. sock, AS. socc, fr. L. soccus a kind of low-heeled, light
shoe. Cf. Sucket.] 1. The shoe worn by actors of comedy in ancient
Greece and Rome, -- used as a symbol of comedy, or of the comic drama,
as distinguished from tragedy, which is symbolized by the buskin.

    Great Fletcher never treads in buskin here, Nor greater Jonson
    dares in socks appear.


Dryden.

2. A knit or woven covering for the foot and lower leg; a stocking with
a short leg.

3. A warm inner sole for a shoe. Simmonds.

Sock*dol"a*ger (?), n. [A corruption of doxology.] [Written also
sockdologer.] 1. That which finishes or ends a matter; a settler; a
poser, as a heavy blow, a conclusive answer, and the like. [Slang,
U.S.]

2. (Angling) A combination of two hooks which close upon each other, by
means of a spring, as soon as the fish bites. [U. S.]

Sock"et (?), n. [OE. soket, a dim. through OF. fr. L. soccus. See Sock
a covering for the foot.] 1. An opening into which anything is fitted;
any hollow thing or place which receives and holds something else; as,
the sockets of the teeth.

    His eyeballs in their hollow sockets sink.


Dryden.

2. Especially, the hollow tube or place in which a candle is fixed in
the candlestick.

    And in the sockets oily bubbles dance.


Dryden.

Socket bolt (Mach.), a bolt that passes through a thimble that is
placed between the parts connected by the bolt. -- Socket chisel. Same
as Framing chisel. See under Framing. -- Socket pipe, a pipe with an
expansion at one end to receive the end of a connecting pipe. -- Socket
pole, a pole armed with iron fixed on by means of a socket, and used to
propel boats, etc. [U.S.] -- Socket wrench, a wrench consisting of a
socket at the end of a shank or rod, for turning a nut, bolthead, etc.,
in a narrow or deep recess.

Sock"et*ed (?), a. Having a socket. Dawkins.

Sock"less, a. Destitute of socks or shoes. B. & Fl.

Sock"y (?), a. Wet; soaky. [Prov. Eng.]

So"cle (?), n. [F., fr. L. socculus, dim. of soccus. See Sock a
covering for the foot. Cf. Zocco.] (Arch.) (a) A plain block or plinth
forming a low pedestal; any base; especially, the base of a statue,
column, or the like. See Plinth. (b) A plain face or plinth at the
lower part of a wall. Oxf. Gloss.

Soc"man (?), n.; pl. Socmen (#). [See Socage.] (O. Eng. Law) One who
holds lands or tenements by socage; a socager. Cowell.

Soc"man*ry (?), n. (O.E. Law) Tenure by socage.

Soc"ome (?), n. [AS. scen, scn, searching, or the right of searching,
the lord's court. See Soc.] (O.Eng. Law) A custom of tenants to grind
corn at the lord's mill. Cowell.

Soc"o*trine (?), a. Of or pertaining to Socotra, an island in the
Indian Ocean, on the east coast of Africa. -- n. A native or inhabitant
of Socotra.

{ So*crat"ic (?), So*crat"ic*al (?), } a. [L. Socraticus, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;&?;.] Of or pertaining to Socrates, the Grecian sage and
teacher. (b. c. 469-399), or to his manner of teaching and
philosophizing.

The Socratic method of reasoning and instruction was by a series of
questions leading the one to whom they were addressed to perceive and
admit what was true or false in doctrine, or right or wrong in conduct.

So*crat"ic*al*ly, adv. In the Socratic method.

Soc"ra*tism (?), n. The philosophy or the method of Socrates.

Soc"ra*tist (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;.] A disciple or follower of
Socrates.

Sod (?), n. (Zoöl.) The rock dove. [Prov. Eng.]

Sod, obs. imp. of Seethe.

Sod, n. [Akin to LG. sode, D. zode, OD. sode, soode, OFries. satha, and
E. seethe. So named from its sodden state in wet weather. See Seethe.]
That stratum of the surface of the soil which is filled with the roots
of grass, or any portion of that surface; turf; sward.

    She there shall dress a sweeter sod Than Fancy's feet have ever
    trod.


Collins.

Sod, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sodden; p. pr. & vb. n. Sodding.] To cover
with sod; to turf.

So"da (?), n. [It., soda, in OIt., ashes used in making glass, fr. L.
solida, fem. of solidus solid; solida having probably been a name of
glasswort. See Solid.] (Chem.) (a) Sodium oxide or hydroxide. (b)
Popularly, sodium carbonate or bicarbonate.

Caustic soda, sodium hydroxide. -- Cooking soda, sodium bicarbonate.
[Colloq.] -- Sal soda. See Sodium carbonate, under Sodium. -- Soda alum
(Min.), a mineral consisting of the hydrous sulphate of alumina and
soda. -- Soda ash, crude sodium carbonate; -- so called because
formerly obtained from the ashes of sea plants and certain other
plants, as saltwort (Salsola). See under Sodium. -- Soda fountain, an
apparatus for drawing soda water, fitted with delivery tube, faucets,
etc. -- Soda lye, a lye consisting essentially of a solution of sodium
hydroxide, used in soap making. -- Soda niter. See Nitratine. -- Soda
salts, salts having sodium for the base; specifically, sodium sulphate
or Glauber's salts. -- Soda waste, the waste material, consisting
chiefly of calcium hydroxide and sulphide, which accumulates as a
useless residue or side product in the ordinary Leblanc process of soda
manufacture; -- called also alkali waste. -- Soda water, originally, a
beverage consisting of a weak solution of sodium bicarbonate, with some
acid to cause effervescence; now, in common usage, a beverage
consisting of water highly charged with carbon dioxide (carbonic acid).
Fruit sirups, cream, etc., are usually added to give flavor. See
Carbonic acid, under Carbonic. -- Washing soda, sodium carbonate.
[Colloq.]

<! p. 1366 !>

So*da"ic (?), a. Pertaining to, or containing, soda. "Sodaic powder."
Ure.

So"da*lite (?), n. [Soda + - lite: cf. F. sodalithe.] (Min.) A mineral
of a white to blue or gray color, occuring commonly in dodecahedrons,
also massive. It is a silicate of alumina and soda with some chlorine.

So*dal"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Sodalities (#). [L. sodalitas, fr. sodalis a
comrade.] 1. A fellowship or fraternity; a brotherhood.

2. (R.C.Ch.) Specifically, a lay association for devotion or for
charitable purposes.

Sod*am"ide (?), n. (Chem.) A greenish or reddish crystalline substance,
NaNH2, obtained by passing ammonia over heated sodium.

Sod"den (?), a. [p. p. of Seethe.] Boiled; seethed; also, soaked; heavy
with moisture; saturated; as, sodden beef; sodden bread; sodden fields.

Sod"den, v. i. To be seethed; to become sodden.

Sod"den, v. t. To soak; to make heavy with water.

Sod"den-wit`ted (?), a. Heavy; dull. Shak.

Sod"dy (?), a. [From Sod.] Consisting of sod; covered with sod; turfy.
Cotgrave.

Sod"er (?), n. & v. t. See Solder.

So"dic (?), a. (Chem.) Of or pertaining to sodium; containing sodium.

So"di*o- (?). (Chem.) A combining form (also used adjectively) denoting
the presence of sodium or one of its compounds.

So"di*um (?), n. [NL., fr.E. soda.] (Chem.) A common metallic element
of the alkali group, in nature always occuring combined, as in common
salt, in albite, etc. It is isolated as a soft, waxy, white, unstable
metal, so readily oxidized that it combines violently with water, and
to be preserved must be kept under petroleum or some similar liquid.
Sodium is used combined in many salts, in the free state as a reducer,
and as a means of obtaining other metals (as magnesium and aluminium)
is an important commercial product. Symbol Na (Natrium). Atomic weight
23. Specific gravity 0.97.

Sodium amalgam, an alloy of sodium and mercury, usually produced as a
gray metallic crystalline substance, which is used as a reducing agent,
and otherwise. -- Sodium bicarbonate, a white crystalline substance,
HNaCO3, with a slight alkaline taste resembling that of sodium
carbonate. It is found in many mineral springs and also produced
artificially,. It is used in cookery, in baking powders, and as a
source of carbonic acid gas (carbon dioxide) for soda water. Called
also cooking soda, saleratus, and technically, acid sodium carbonate,
primary sodium carbonate, sodium dicarbonate, etc. -- Sodium carbonate,
a white crystalline substance, Na2CO3.10H2O, having a cooling alkaline
taste, found in the ashes of many plants, and produced artifically in
large quantities from common salt. It is used in making soap, glass,
paper, etc., and as alkaline agent in many chemical industries. Called
also sal soda, washing soda, or soda. Cf. Sodium bicarbonate, above and
Trona. -- Sodium chloride, common, or table, salt, NaCl. -- Sodium
hydroxide, a white opaque brittle solid, NaOH, having a fibrous
structure, produced by the action of quicklime, or of calcium hydrate
(milk of lime), on sodium carbonate. It is a strong alkali, and is used
in the manufacture of soap, in making wood pulp for paper, etc. Called
also sodium hydrate, and caustic soda. By extension, a solution of
sodium hydroxide.

Sod"om*ite (?), n. 1. An inhabitant of Sodom.

2. One guilty of sodomy.

Sod`om*it"ic*al (?), a. Pertaining to, or of the nature of, sodomy. --
Sod`om*it"ic*al*ly, adv.

Sod"om*y (?), n. [From Sodom. a country mentioned in the Bible: cf. F.
sodomite.] Carnal copulation in a manner against nature; buggery. Gen.
xix. 5.

Soe (?), n. [Scot. sae, say, saye; cf. Icel. sr a large cask, Sw. s&?;
a tub.] A large wooden vessel for holding water; a cowl. [Obs. or Prov.
Eng.] Dr. H. More.

So*ev"er (?). A word compounded of so and ever, used in composition
with who, what, where, when, how, etc., and indicating any out of all
possible or supposable persons, things, places, times, ways, etc. It is
sometimes used separate from the pronoun or adverb.

    For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required.


Luke xii. 48.

    What great thing soever a man proposed to do in his life, he should
    think of achieving it by fifty.


Sir W. Temple.

So"fa (?), n.; pl. Sofas (#). [Ar. soffah, from saffa to dispose in
order: cf. F. sofa, It. sofà.] A long seat, usually with a cushioned
bottom, back, and ends; -- much used as a comfortable piece of
furniture.

    Let fall the curtains, wheel the sofa round.


Cowper.

Sofa bed, a sofa so contrived that it may be extended to form a bed; --
called also sofa bedstead.

Sof"fit (?), n. [It. soffitta, soffitto, fr. soffiggere to hide,
properly, to fix or fasten under, L. suffigere to fasten beneath or
below; sub under, beneath + figere to fix, faste: cf. F. soffite.]
(Arch.) The under side of the subordinate parts and members of
buildings, such as staircases, entablatures, archways, cornices, or the
like. See Illust. of Lintel.

So"fi (?), n.; pl. Sofis (&?;). Same as Sufi.

So"fism (?), n. Same as Sufism.

Soft (?), a. [Compar. Softer (?); superl. Softest.] [OE. softe, AS.
s&?;fte, properly adv. of s&?;fte, adj.; akin to OS. sfto, adv., D.
zacht, OHG. samfto, adv., semfti, adj., G. sanft, LG. sacht; of
uncertain origin.] 1. Easily yielding to pressure; easily impressed,
molded, or cut; not firm in resisting; impressible; yielding; also,
malleable; -- opposed to hard; as, a soft bed; a soft peach; soft
earth; soft wood or metal.

2. Not rough, rugged, or harsh to the touch; smooth; delicate; fine;
as, soft silk; a soft skin.

    They that wear soft clothing are in king's houses.


Matt. xi. 8.

3. Hence, agreeable to feel, taste, or inhale; not irritating to the
tissues; as, a soft liniment; soft wines. "The soft, delicious air."
Milton.

4. Not harsh or offensive to the sight; not glaring; pleasing to the
eye; not exciting by intensity of color or violent contrast; as, soft
hues or tints.

    The sun, shining upon the upper part of the clouds . . . made the
    softest lights imaginable.


Sir T. Browne.

5. Not harsh or rough in sound; gentle and pleasing to the ear;
flowing; as, soft whispers of music.

    Her voice was ever soft, Gentle, and low, -- an excellent thing in
    woman.


Shak.

    Soft were my numbers; who could take offense?


Pope.

6. Easily yielding; susceptible to influence; flexible; gentle; kind.

    I would to God my heart were flint, like Edward's; Or Edward's soft
    and pitiful, like mine.


Shak.

    The meek or soft shall inherit the earth.


Tyndale.

7. Expressing gentleness, tenderness, or the like; mild; conciliatory;
courteous; kind; as, soft eyes.

    A soft answer turneth away wrath.


Prov. xv. 1.

    A face with gladness overspread, Soft smiles, by human kindness
    bred.


Wordsworth.

8. Effeminate; not courageous or manly, weak.

    A longing after sensual pleasures is a dissolution of the spirit of
    a man, and makes it loose, soft, and wandering.


Jer. Taylor.

9. Gentle in action or motion; easy.

    On her soft axle, white she paces even, And bears thee soft with
    the smooth air along.


Milton.

10. Weak in character; impressible.

    The deceiver soon found this soft place of Adam's.


Glanvill.

11. Somewhat weak in intellect. [Colloq.]

    He made soft fellows stark noddies, and such as were foolish quite
    mad.


Burton.

12. Quiet; undisturbed; paceful; as, soft slumbers.

13. Having, or consisting of, a gentle curve or curves; not angular or
abrupt; as, soft outlines.

14. Not tinged with mineral salts; adapted to decompose soap; as, soft
water is the best for washing.

15. (Phonetics) (a) Applied to a palatal, a sibilant, or a dental
consonant (as g in gem, c in cent, etc.) as distinguished from a
guttural mute (as g in go, c in cone, etc.); -- opposed to hard. (b)
Belonging to the class of sonant elements as distinguished from the
surd, and considered as involving less force in utterance; as, b, d, g,
z, v, etc., in contrast with p, t, k, s, f, etc.

Soft clam (Zoöl.), the common or long clam (Mya arenaria). See Mya. --
Soft coal, bituminous coal, as distinguished from anthracite, or hard,
coal. -- Soft crab (Zoöl.), any crab which has recently shed its shell.
-- Soft dorsal (Zoöl.), the posterior part of the dorsal fin of fishes
when supported by soft rays. -- Soft grass. (Bot.) See Velvet grass. --
Soft money, paper money, as distinguished from coin, or hard money.
[Colloq. U.S.] -- Soft mute. (Phonetics) See Media. -- Soft palate. See
the Note under Palate. -- Soft ray (Zoöl.), a fin ray which is
articulated and usually branched. -- Soft soap. See under Soap. --
Soft-tack, leavened bread, as distinguished from hard-tack, or ship
bread. -- Soft tortoise (Zoöl.), any river tortoise of the genus
Trionyx. See Trionyx.

Soft (?), n. A soft or foolish person; an idiot. [Colloq.] G. Eliot.

Soft, adv. Softly; without roughness or harshness; gently; quietly.
Chaucer.

    A knight soft riding toward them.


Spenser.

Soft, interj. Be quiet; hold; stop; not so fast.

    Soft, you; a word or two before you go.


Shak.

Sof"ta (?), n. [Corruption of Per. s&?;khtah one who burns, is ardent
or zealous.] Any one attached to a Mohammedan mosque, esp. a student of
the higher branches of theology in a mosque school. [Written also
sophta.]

Sof"ten (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Softened (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Softening.] To make soft or more soft. Specifically: --

(a) To render less hard; -- said of matter.

    Their arrow's point they soften in the flame.


Gay.

(b) To mollify; to make less fierce or intractable.

    Diffidence conciliates the proud, and softens the severe.


Rambler.

(c) To palliate; to represent as less enormous; as, to soften a fault.

(d) To compose; to mitigate; to assuage.

    Music can soften pain to ease.


Pope.

(e) To make calm and placid.

    All that cheers or softens life.


Pope.

(f) To make less harsh, less rude, less offensive, or less violent, or
to render of an opposite quality.

    He bore his great commision in his look, But tempered awe, and
    softened all he spoke.


Dryden.

(g) To make less glaring; to tone down; as, to soften the coloring of a
picture.

(h) To make tender; to make effeminate; to enervate; as, troops
softened by luxury.

(i) To make less harsh or grating, or of a quality the opposite; as, to
soften the voice.

Sof"ten, v. i. To become soft or softened, or less rude, harsh, severe,
or obdurate.

Sof"ten*er (?), n. One who, or that which, softens. [Written also, less
properly, softner.]

Sof"ten*ing, a. & n. from Soften, v.

Softening of the brain, or Cerebral softening (Med.), a localized
softening of the brain substance, due to hemorrhage or inflammation.
Three varieties, distinguished by their color and representing
different stages of the morbid process, are known respectively as red,
yellow, and white, softening.

Soft"-finned` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the fin rays cartilaginous or
flexible; without spines; -- said of certain fishes.

Soft"-head`ed (?), a. Weak in intellect.

Soft"-heart`ed (?), a. Having softness or tenderness of heart;
susceptible of pity or other kindly affection; gentle; meek. --
Soft"-heart`ed*ness, n.

Soft"ish (?), a. Somewhat soft. De Witt Clinton.

Soft"ling (?), n. A soft, effeminate person; a voluptuary. [R.] Bp.
Woolton. .

Soft"ly, adv. In a soft manner.

Soft"ner (?), n. See Softener.

Soft"ness (?), n. [AS. s&?;ftness, s&?;ftnyss.] The quality or state of
being soft; -- opposed to hardness, and used in the various specific
senses of the adjective.

Soft"-shell` (?), Soft"-shelled` (?), } a. Having a soft or fragile
shell.

Soft-shell clam (Zoöl.), the long clam. See Mya. -- Soft-shelled crab.
(Zoöl.) See the Note under Crab, 1. -- Soft-shelled turtle. (Zoöl.)
Same as Soft tortoise, under Soft.

Soft"-spo`ken (?), a. Speaking softly; having a mild or gentle voice;
hence, mild; affable.

Sog"gi*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being soggy; soddenness;
wetness.

Sog"gy (?), a. [Compar. Soggier (?); superl. Soggiest.] [Cf. Icel.
söggr damp, wet, or E. soak.] Filled with water; soft with moisture;
sodden; soaked; wet; as, soggy land or timber.

So*ho" (?), interj. Ho; -- a word used in calling from a distant place;
a sportsman's halloo. Shak.

||Soi`-di`sant" (?), a. [F.] Calling himself; self-styled; pretended;
||would-be.

Soil (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soiled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Soiling.]
[OF. saoler, saouler, to satiate, F. soûler, L. satullare, fr.
satullus, dim. of satur sated. See Satire.] To feed, as cattle or
horses, in the barn or an inclosure, with fresh grass or green food cut
for them, instead of sending them out to pasture; hence (such food
having the effect of purging them), to purge by feeding on green food;
as, to soil a horse.

Soil, n. [OE. soile, F. sol, fr. L. solum bottom, soil; but the word
has probably been influenced in form by soil a miry place. Cf. Saloon,
Soil a miry place, Sole of the foot.] 1. The upper stratum of the
earth; the mold, or that compound substance which furnishes nutriment
to plants, or which is particularly adapted to support and nourish
them.

2. Land; country.

    Must I thus leave thee, Paradise? thus leave Thee, native soil?


Milton.

3. Dung; fæces; compost; manure; as, night soil.

    Improve land by dung and other sort of soils.


Mortimer.

Soil pipe, a pipe or drain for carrying off night soil.

Soil, v. t. To enrich with soil or muck; to manure.

    Men . . . soil their ground, not that they love the dirt, but that
    they expect a crop.


South.

Soil, n. [OF. soil, souil, F. souille, from OF. soillier, F. souiller.
See Soil to make dirty.] A marshy or miry place to which a hunted boar
resorts for refuge; hence, a wet place, stream, or tract of water,
sought for by other game, as deer.

    As deer, being stuck, fly through many soils, Yet still the shaft
    sticks fast.


Marston.

To take soil, to run into the mire or water; hence, to take refuge or
shelter.

    O, sir, have you taken soil here? It is well a man may reach you
    after three hours' running.


B. Jonson.

Soil, v. t.[OE. soilen, OF. soillier, F. souiller, (assumed) LL.
suculare, fr. L. sucula a little pig, dim. of sus a swine. See Sow, n.]
1. To make dirty or unclean on the surface; to foul; to dirty; to
defile; as, to soil a garment with dust.

    Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained.


Milton.

2. To stain or mar, as with infamy or disgrace; to tarnish; to sully.
Shak.

Syn. -- To foul; dirt; dirty; begrime; bemire; bespatter; besmear;
daub; bedaub; stain; tarnish; sully; defile; pollute.

Soil, v. i. To become soiled; as, light colors soil sooner than dark
ones.

Soil, n. [See Soil to make dirty, Soil a miry place.] That which soils
or pollutes; a soiled place; spot; stain.

    A lady's honor . . . will not bear a soil.


Dryden.

Soil"i*ness (?), n. Stain; foulness. [R.] Bacon.

Soil"less, a. Destitute of soil or mold.

Soil"ure (?), n. [OF. soillure, F. souillure. See Soil to make dirty.]
Stain; pollution. Shak.

    Then fearing rust or soilure, fashioned for it A case of silk.


Tennyson.

Soil"y (?), a. Dirty; soiled. [Obs.] Fuller.

||Soi`ree" (?), n. [F., fr. soir evening, fr. L. serus late, serum late
||time. Cf. Serenade.] An evening party; -- distinguished from levee,
||and matinée.

So"ja (s"j or s"y), n. (Bot.) An Asiatic leguminous herb (Glycine Soja)
the seeds of which are used in preparing the sauce called soy.

So"journ (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sojourned (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sojourning.] [OE. sojornen, sojournen, OF. sojorner, sejorner, F.
séjourner, fr. L. sub under, about + diurnus belonging to the day. See
Journal, Diurnal.] To dwell for a time; to dwell or live in a place as
a temporary resident or as a stranger, not considering the place as a
permanent habitation; to delay; to tarry.

    Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there.


Gen. xii. 30.

    Home he goeth, he might not longer sojourn.


Chaucer.

    The soldiers first assembled at Newcastle, and there sojourned
    three days.


Hayward.

So"journ, n. [Cf. OF. sujurn, sujur, sejor, F. séjour. See Sojourn, v.
i.] A temporary residence, as that of a traveler in a foreign land.

    Though long detained In that obscure sojourn.


Milton.

So"journ*er (?), n. One who sojourns.

    We are strangers before thee, and sojourners.


1. Chron. xxix. 15.

So"journ*ing, n. The act or state of one who sojourns.

So"journ*ment (?), n. Temporary residence, as that of a stranger or a
traveler. [R.]

Soke (?), n. 1. (Eng. Law) See Soc.

<! p. 1367 !>

2. One of the small territorial divisions into which Lincolnshire,
England, is divided.

Soke"man (?), n. See Socman.

Soke"man*ry (?), n. See Socmanry.

Sok"en (?), n. [Cf. Socome.] 1. A toll. See Soc, n., 2. [Obs.]

    Great sooken had this miller, out of doubt.


Chaucer.

2. A district held by socage.

So"ko (?), n. (Zoöl.) An African anthropoid ape, supposed to be a
variety of the chimpanzee.

||Sol (?), n. [L.] 1. The sun.

2. (Alchem.) Gold; -- so called from its brilliancy, color, and value.
Chaucer.

Sol (?), n. [It.] (Mus.) (a) A syllable applied in solmization to the
note G, or to the fifth tone of any diatonic scale. (b) The tone
itself.

Sol (?), n. [See Sou.] 1. A sou.

2. A silver and gold coin of Peru. The silver sol is the unit of value,
and is worth about 68 cents.

||So"la (?), a. [L., fem. of solus.] See Solus.

So"la, n. [Native name.] (Bot.) A leguminous plant (Æschynomene aspera)
growing in moist places in Southern India and the East Indies. Its
pithlike stem is used for making hats, swimming-jackets, etc. [Written
also solah, shola.]

Sol"ace (?), n. [OF. solas, ssoulaz, L. solacium, solatium, fr. solari
to comfort, console. Cf. Console, v. t.] 1. Comfort in grief;
alleviation of grief or anxiety; also, that which relieves in distress;
that which cheers or consoles; relief.

    In business of mirth and of solace.


Chaucer.

    The proper solaces of age are not music and compliments, but wisdom
    and devotion.


Rambler.

2. Rest; relaxation; ease. [Obs.]

    To make his steed some solace.


Chaucer.

Syn. -- Comfort; consolation; alleviation; relief.

Sol"ace, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Solaced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Solacing
(?).] [OF. solacier, soulacier, F. solacier, LL. solatiare. See Solace,
n.] 1. To cheer in grief or under calamity; to comfort; to relieve in
affliction, solitude, or discomfort; to console; -- applied to persons;
as, to solace one with the hope of future reward.

2. To allay; to assuage; to soothe; as, to solace grief.

Syn. -- To comfort; assuage; allay. See Comfort.

Sol"ace, v. i. To take comfort; to be cheered. Shak.

Sol"ace*ment (?), n. The act of solacing, or the state of being
solaced; also, that which solaces. [R.]

So*la"cious (?), a. [Cf. OF. solacieux.] Affording solace; as, a
solacious voice. [Obs.] Bale.

Sol`a*na"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of or pertaining to plants of the natural
order Solanaceæ, of which the nightshade (Solanum) is the type. The
order includes also the tobacco, ground cherry, tomato, eggplant, red
pepper, and many more.

So"land (?), n. (Zoöl.) A solan goose.

So*lan"der (?), n. See Sallenders.

So"lan goose` (?). [Icel. s&?;la; akin to Norw. sula.] (Zoöl.) The
common gannet.

So*la"ni*a (?), n. [NL.] (Chem.) Solanine.

So*lan"i*cine (?), n. [See Solanine.] (Chem.) An alkaloid produced by
the action of hydrochloric acid on solanidine, as a tasteless yellow
crystalline substance.

So*lan"i*dine (?), n. [See Solanine.] (Chem.) An alkaloid produced by
the decomposition of solanine, as a white crystalline substance having
a harsh bitter taste.

Sol"a*nine (?), n. [L. solanum nightshade.] (Chem.) A poisonous
alkaloid glucoside extracted from the berries of common nightshade
(Solanum nigrum), and of bittersweet, and from potato sprouts, as a
white crystalline substance having an acrid, burning taste; -- called
also solonia, and solanina.

||So*la"no (?), [Sp., fr. L. solanus (sc. ventus), from sol the sun.] A
||hot, oppressive wind which sometimes blows in the Mediterranean,
||particularly on the eastern coast of Spain.

Sol"a*noid (?), a. [Solanum + -oid.] (Med.) Resembling a potato; --
said of a kind of cancer.

So*la"num (?), n. [L., nightshade.] (Bot.) A genus of plants
comprehending the potato (S. tuberosum), the eggplant (S. melongena,
and several hundred other species; nightshade.

So"lar (?), n. [OE. soler, AS. solere, L. solarium, from sol the sun.
See Solar, a.] A loft or upper chamber; a garret room. [Obs.] [Written
also soler, solere, sollar.] Oxf. Gloss.

So"lar, a. [L. solaris, fr. sol the sun; akin to As. sl, Icel. sl,
Goth. sauil, Lith. saule, W. haul,. sul, Skr. svar, perhaps to E.
sun:F. solaire. Cf. Parasol. Sun.] 1. Of or pertaining to the sun;
proceeding from the sun; as, the solar system; solar light; solar rays;
solar influence. See Solar system, below.

2. (Astrol.) Born under the predominant influence of the sun. [Obs.]

    And proud beside, as solar people are.


Dryden.

3. Measured by the progress or revolution of the sun in the ecliptic;
as, the solar year.

4. Produced by the action of the sun, or peculiarly affected by its
influence.

    They denominate some herbs solar, and some lunar.


Bacon.

Solar cycle. See under Cycle. -- Solar day. See Day, 2. -- Solar
engine, an engine in which the energy of solar heat is used to produce
motion, as in evaporating water for a steam engine, or expanding air
for an air engine. -- Solar flowers (Bot.), flowers which open and shut
daily at certain hours. -- Solar lamp, an argand lamp. -- Solar
microscope, a microscope consisting essentially, first, of a mirror for
reflecting a beam of sunlight through the tube, which sometimes is
fixed in a window shutter; secondly, of a condenser, or large lens, for
converging the beam upon the object; and, thirdly, of a small lens, or
magnifier, for throwing an enlarged image of the object at its focus
upon a screen in a dark room or in a darkened box.

-- Solar month. See under Month. -- Solar oil, a paraffin oil used an
illuminant and lubricant. -- Solar phosphori (Physics), certain
substances, as the diamond, siulphide of barium (Bolognese or Bologna
phosphorus), calcium sulphide, etc., which become phosphorescent, and
shine in the dark, after exposure to sunlight or other intense light.
-- Solar plexus (Anat.), a nervous plexus situated in the dorsal and
anterior part of the abdomen, consisting of several sympathetic ganglia
with connecting and radiating nerve fibers; -- so called in allusion to
the radiating nerve fibers. -- Solar spots. See Sun spots, under Sun.
-- Solar system (Astron.), the sun, with the group of celestial bodies
which, held by its attraction, revolve round it. The system comprises
the major planets, with their satellites; the minor planets, or
asteroids, and the comets; also, the meteorids, the matter that
furnishes the zodiacal light, and the rings of Saturn. The satellites
that revolve about the major planets are twenty-two in number, of which
the Earth has one (see Moon.), Mars two, Jupiter five, Saturn nine,
Uranus four, and Neptune one. The asteroids, between Mars and Jupiter,
thus far discovered (1900), number about five hundred, the first four
of which were found near the beginning of the century, and are called
Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta.

The principal elements of the major planets, and of the comets seen at
more than one perihelion passage, are exhibited in the following
tables: --

-- Solar telegraph, telegraph for signaling by flashes of reflected
sunlight. -- Solar time. See Apparent time, under Time.

||So*la"ri*um (?), n.; pl. Solaria (#). [L. See Solar, n.] 1. An
||apartment freely exposed to the sun; anciently, an apartment or
||inclosure on the roof of a house; in modern times, an apartment in a
||hospital, used as a resort for convalescents.

2. (Zoöl.) Any one of several species of handsome marine spiral shells
of the genus Solarium and allied genera. The shell is conical, and
usually has a large, deep umbilicus exposing the upper whorls. Called
also perspective shell.

So`lar*i*za"tion (?), n. (Photog.) Injury of a photographic picture
caused by exposing it for too long a time to the sun's light in the
camera; burning; excessive insolation.

So"lar*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Solarized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Solarizing (?).] (Photog.) To injure by too long exposure to the light
of the sun in the camera; to burn.

So"lar*ize, v. i. (Photog.) To become injured by undue or too long
exposure to the sun's rays in the camera.

So"la*ry (?), a. Solar. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

Sol"as (?), n. Solace. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||So*la"ti*um (?), n. [L. See Solace, n.] Anything which alleviates or
||compensates for suffering or loss; a compensation; esp., an
||additional allowance, as for injured feelings.

Sold (?), imp. & p. p. of Sell.

Sold, n. [F. solde. See Soldier, and cf. Sou.] Solary; military pay.
[Obs.] Spenser.

Sol"dan (?), n.[OE. soudan, F. soudan, from the Arabic. See Sultan.] A
sultan. [Obs.] Milton.

Sol"da*nel (?), n. (Bot.) A plant of the genus Soldanella, low Alpine
herbs of the Primrose family.

Sol"dan*rie (?), n. The country ruled by a soldan, or sultan. [Poet.]
Sir W. Scott.

Sol"der (?), n. [Formerly soder; F. soudure, OF. soudeure, fr. OF. & F.
souder to solder, L. solidare to fasten, to make solid. See Solid, and
cf. Sawder.] A metal or metallic alloy used when melted for uniting
adjacent metallic edges or surfaces; a metallic cement. Hence, anything
which unites or cements.

Hard solder, a solder which fuses only at a red heat, as one composed
of zinc and copper, or silver and copper, etc. -- Soft solder, a solder
fusible at comparatively low temperatures; as, plumbers' solder,
consisting of two parts lead and one part tin, is a soft solder.

Sol"der, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soldered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Soldering.]
[Formerlysoder. See Solder, n.] 1. To unite (metallic surfaces or
edges) by the intervention of a more fusible metal or metallic alloy
applied when melted; to join by means of metallic cement.

2. To mend; to patch up. "To solder up a broken cause." Hooker.

Sol"der*er (?), n. One who solders.

Sol"der*ing, a. & n. from Solder, v. t.

Soldering iron, Soldering tool, an instrument for soldering, consisting
of a bit or bolt of copper having a pointed or wedge-shaped end, and
furnished with a handle.

Sol"dier (?), n. [OE. souldier, soudiour, souder, OF. soldier,
soldoier, soldeier, sodoier, soudoier, soudier, fr. L. solidus a piece
of money (hence applied to the pay of a soldier), fr. solidus solid.
See Solid, and cf. Sold, n.] 1. One who is engaged in military service
as an officer or a private; one who serves in an army; one of an
organized body of combatants.

    I am a soldier and unapt to weep.


Shak.

2. Especially, a private in military service, as distinguished from an
officer.

    It were meet that any one, before he came to be a captain, should
    have been a soldier.


Spenser.

3. A brave warrior; a man of military experience and skill, or a man of
distinguished valor; -- used by way of emphasis or distinction. Shak.

4. (Zoöl.) The red or cuckoo gurnard (Trigla pini.) [Prov. Eng.]

5. (Zoöl.) One of the asexual polymorphic forms of white ants, or
termites, in which the head and jaws are very large and strong. The
soldiers serve to defend the nest. See Termite.

Soldier beetle (Zoöl.), an American carabid beetle (Chauliognathus
Americanus) whose larva feeds upon other insects, such as the plum
curculio. -- Soldier bug (Zoöl.), any hemipterous insect of the genus
Podisus and allied genera, as the spined soldier bug (Podius spinosus).
These bugs suck the blood of other insects. -- Soldier crab (Zoöl.) (a)
The hermit crab. (b) The fiddler crab. -- Soldier fish (Zoöl.), a
bright-colored etheostomoid fish (Etheostoma cœruleum) found in the
Mississippi River; -- called also blue darter, and rainbow darter. --
Soldier fly (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of small dipterous
flies of the genus Stratyomys and allied genera. They are often bright
green, with a metallic luster, and are ornamented on the sides of the
back with markings of yellow, like epaulets or shoulder straps. --
Soldier moth (Zoöl.), a large geometrid moth (Euschema militaris),
having the wings bright yellow with bluish black lines and spots. --
Soldier orchis (Bot.), a kind of orchis (Orchis militaris).

Sol"dier, v. i. 1. To serve as a soldier.

2. To make a pretense of doing something, or of performing any task.
[Colloq.U.S.]

In this sense the vulgar pronounciation (s"jr) is jocosely preserved.

    It needs an opera glass to discover whether the leaders are
    pulling, or only soldiering.


C. D. Warner.

Sol"dier*ess, n. A female soldier. [Obs.]

Sol"dier*ing, n. 1. The act of serving as a soldier; the state of being
a soldier; the occupation of a soldier.

2. The act of feigning to work. See the Note under Soldier, v. i., 2.
[Colloq. U.S.]

Sol"dier*like" (?), a. Like a soldier; soldierly.

Sol"dier*ly, a. Like or becoming a real soldier; brave; martial;
heroic; honorable; soldierlike. "Soldierly discipline." Sir P. Sidney.

Sol"dier*ship, n. Military qualities or state; martial skill; behavior
becoming a soldier. [R.] Shak.

Sol"dier*wood` (?), n. (Bot.) A showy leguminous plant (Calliandra
purpurea) of the West Indies. The flowers have long tassels of purple
stamens.

Sol"dier*y (?), n. 1. A body of soldiers; soldiers, collectivelly; the
military.

    A camp of faithful soldiery.


Milton.

2. Military service. [Obs.] Sir P. Sidney.

||Sol"do (?), n.; pl. Soldi (#). [It. See Sou.] A small Italian coin
||worth a sou or a cent; the twentieth part of a lira.

Sole (?), n. [F. sole, L. solea; -- so named from its flat shape. See
Sole of the foot.] (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of several species of flatfishes
of the genus Solea and allied genera of the family Soleidæ, especially
the common European species (Solea vulgaris), which is a valuable food
fish. (b) Any one of several American flounders somewhat resembling the
true sole in form or quality, as the California sole (Lepidopsetta
bilineata), the long-finned sole (Glyptocephalus zachirus), and other
species.

Lemon, or French, sole (Zoöl.), a European species of sole (Solea
pegusa). -- Smooth sole (Zoöl.), the megrim.

<! p. 1368 !>

Sole (?), n. [AS. sole, fr. L. soolea (or rather an assumed L. sola),
akin to solumround, soil, sole of the foot. Cf. Exile, Saloon, Soil
earth, Sole the fish.] 1. The bottom of the foot; hence, also, rarely,
the foot itself.

    The dove found no rest for the sole of her foot.


Gen. viii. 9.

    Hast wandered through the world now long a day, Yet ceasest not thy
    weary soles to lead.


Spenser.

2. The bottom of a shoe or boot, or the piece of leather which
constitutes the bottom.

    The "caliga" was a military shoe, with a very thick sole, tied
    above the instep.


Arbuthnot.

3. The bottom or lower part of anything, or that on which anything
rests in standing. Specifially: (a) (Agric.) The bottom of the body of
a plow; -- called also slade; also, the bottom of a furrow. (b) (Far.)
The horny substance under a horse's foot, which protects the more
tender parts. (c) (Fort.) The bottom of an embrasure. (d) (Naut.) A
piece of timber attached to the lower part of the rudder, to make it
even with the false keel. Totten. (e) (Mining) The seat or bottom of a
mine; -- applied to horizontal veins or lodes.

Sole leather, thick, strong, used for making the soles of boots and
shoes, and for other purposes.

Sole, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Soling.] To
furnish with a sole; as, to sole a shoe.

Sole, a. [L. solus, or OF. sol, F. seul (fr. L. solus; cf. L. sollus
whole, entire. Cf. Desolate, Solemn, Solo, Sullen.] 1. Being or acting
without another; single; individual; only. "The sole son of my queen."
Shak.

    He, be sure . . . first and last will reign Sole king.


Milton.

2. (Law) Single; unmarried; as, a feme sole.

Corporation sole. See the Note under Corporation.

Syn. -- Single; individual; only; alone; solitary.

Sol"e*cism (?), n.[F. solécisme, L. soloecismus, Gr. soloikismo`s, fr.
soloiki`zein to speak or write incorrectly, fr. so`loikos speaking
incorrectly, from the corruption of the Attic dialect among the
Athenian colonists of So`loi in Cilicia.] 1. An impropriety or
incongruity of language in the combination of words or parts of a
sentence; esp., deviation from the idiom of a language or from the
rules of syntax.

    A barbarism may be in one word; a solecism must be of more.


Johnson.

2. Any inconsistency, unfitness, absurdity, or impropriety, as in deeds
or manners.

    Cæsar, by dismissing his guards and retaining his power, committed
    a dangerous solecism in politics.


C. Middleton.

    The idea of having committed the slightest solecism in politeness
    was agony to him.


Sir W. Scott.

Syn. -- Barbarism; impropriety; absurdity.

Sol"e*cist (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;.] One who commits a solecism.
Blackwall.

Sol`e*cis"tic (?), a. Solecistical.

Sol`e*cis"tic*al (?), a. Pertaining to, or involving, a solecism;
incorrect. "He thought it made the language solecistical and absurd."
Blackwall.

Sol`e*cis"tic*al*ly, adv. In a solecistic manner.

Sol"e*cize (?), v. i. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?;.] To commit a solecism. [R.]
Dr. H. More.

Sole"ly (?), adv. Singly; alone; only; without another; as, to rest a
cause solely one argument; to rely solelyn one's own strength.

Sol"emn (?), a. [OE. solempne, OF. solempne, L. solemnis, solennis,
sollemnis, sollennis; sollus all, entire + annus a year; properly, that
takes place every year; -- used especially of religious solemnities.
Cf. Silly, Annual.] 1. Marked with religious rites and pomps; enjoined
by, or connected with, religion; sacred.

    His holy rites and solemn feasts profaned.


Milton.

    The worship of this image was advanced, and a solemn supplication
    observed everry year.


Bp. Stillingfleet.

2. Pertaining to a festival; festive; festal. [Obs.] "On this solemn
day." Chaucer.

3. Stately; ceremonious; grand. [Archaic]

    His feast so solemn and so rich.


Chaucer.

    To-night we hold a splemn supper.


Shak.

4. Fitted to awaken or express serious reflections; marked by
seriousness; serious; grave; devout; as, a solemn promise; solemn
earnestness.

    Nor wanting power to mitigate and swage With solemn touches
    troubled thoughts.


Milton.

    There reigned a solemn silence over all.


Spenser.

5. Real; earnest; downright. [Obs. & R.]

    Frederick, the emperor, . . . has spared no expense in
    strengthening this city; since which time we find no solemn taking
    it by the Turks.


Fuller.

6. Affectedly grave or serious; as, to put on a solemn face. "A solemn
coxcomb." Swift.

7. (Law) Made in form; ceremonious; as, solemn war; conforming with all
legal requirements; as, probate in solemn form. Burrill. Jarman.
Greenleaf.

Solemn League and Covenant. See Covenant, 2.

Syn. -- Grave; formal; ritual; ceremonial; sober; serious; reverential;
devotional; devout. See Grave.

Sol"em*ness (?), n. Solemnness.

    Some think he wanted solemnes.


Sir H. Wotton.

So*lem"ni*ty (?), n.; pl. Solemnities (#). [L. solemnitas, solennitas:
cf. F. solennité, solemnité, OF. also sollempnité.] 1. A rite or
ceremony performed with religious reverence; religious or ritual
ceremony; as, the solemnity of a funeral, a sacrament.

    Great was the cause; our old solemnities From no blind zeal or fond
    tradition rise, But saved from death, our Argives yearly pay These
    grateful honors to the god of day.


Pope.

2. ceremony adapted to impress with awe.

    The forms and solemnities of the last judgment.


Atterburry.

3. Ceremoniousness; impressiveness; seriousness; grave earnestness;
formal dignity; gravity.

    With much glory and great solemnity.


Chaucer.

    The statelines and gravity of the Spaniards shows itself in the
    solemnity of their language.


Addison.

    These promises were often made with great solemnity and confirmed
    with an oath.


J. Edwards.

4. Hence, affected gravity or seriousness.

    Solemnity 's a cover for a sot.


Young.

5. Solemn state or feeling; awe or reverence; also, that which produces
such a feeling; as, the solemnity of an audience; the solemnity of
Westminster Abbey.

6. (Law) A solemn or formal observance; proceeding according to due
form; the formality which is necessary to render a thing done valid.

So*lem"ni*zate (?), v. t. To solemnize; as, to solemnizate matrimony.
[R.] Bp. Burnet.

Sol`em*ni*za"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. solemnisation, solennisation.] The
act of solemnizing; celebration; as, the solemnization of a marriage.

Sol"em*nize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Solemnized (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Solemnizing (?).] [Cf. F. solemniser, sollemniser.] 1. To perform with
solemn or ritual ceremonies, or according to legal forms.

    Baptism to be administered in one place, and marriage solemnized in
    another.


Hooker.

2. To dignify or honor by ceremonies; to celebrate.

    Their choice nobility and flowers . . . Met from all parts to
    solemnize this feast.


Milton.

3. To make grave, serious, and reverential.

    Wordsworth was solemnizzed and elevated by this his first look on
    Yarrow.


J. C. Shairp.

    Every Israelite . . . arose, solemnized his face, looked towards
    Jerusalem . . . and prayed.


L. Wallace.

Sol"em*nize, n. Solemnization. [R.]

    Though spoused, yet wanting wedlock's solemnize.


Spenser.

Sol"em*ni`zer (?), n. One who solemnizes.

Sol"emn*ly (?), adv. In a solemn manner; with gravity; seriously;
formally.

    There in deaf murmurs solemnly are wise.


Dryden.

    I do solemnly assure the reader.


Swift.

Sol"emn*ness, n. The state or quality of being solemn; solemnity;
impressiveness; gravity; as, the solemnness of public worship. [Written
also solemness.]

So*lemp"ne (?), a. [See Solemn.] Solemn; grand; stately; splendid;
magnificent. [Obs.] Chaucer.

||So"len (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; channel, a shellfish.] 1.
||(Med.) A cradle, as for a broken limb. See Cradle, 6.

2. (Zoöl.) Any marine bivalve mollusk belonging to Solen or allied
genera of the family Solenidæ; a razor shell.

Sol`e*na"cean (?), n. (Zoöl). Any species of marine bivalve shells
belonging to the family Solenidæ.

Sol`e*na"ceous (?), a. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the solens or family
Solenidæ.

Sole"ness (?), n. The state of being sole, or alone; singleness. [R.]
Chesterfield.

Sole*nette" (?), n. (Zoöl.) A small European sole (Solea minuta).

||So*le`no*con"cha (?), n. pl. [NL. See Solen, and Conch.] (Zoöl.) Same
||as Scaphopoda.

So*le"no*don (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a channel + &?;&?;&?;&?;,
&?;&?;&?;, a tooth.] (Zoöl.) Either one of two species of singular West
Indian insectivores, allied to the tenrec. One species (Solendon
paradoxus), native of St. Domingo, is called also agouta; the other (S.
Cubanus), found in Cuba, is called almique.

So*le`no*gas"tra (?), n. pl. [NL., from Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; channel +
&?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;&?;, stomach.] (Zoöl.) An order of lowly
organized Mollusca belonging to the Isopleura. A narrow groove takes
the place of the foot of other gastropods.

So*le"no*glyph (?), a. (Zoöl.) Pertaining to the Selenoglypha. See
Ophidia. -- n. One of the Selenoglypha.

||So`le*nog"ly*pha (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a channel +
||&?;&?;&?;&?; to engrave.] (Zoöl.) A suborder of serpents including
||those which have tubular erectile fangs, as the viper and
||rattlesnake. See Fang.

So"len*oid (?), n.[Gr. &?;&?;&?; channel + -oid.] (Elec.) An
electrodynamic spiral having the conjuctive wire turned back along its
axis, so as to neutralize that component of the effect of the current
which is due to the length of the spiral, and reduce the whole effect
to that of a series of equal and parallel circular currents. When
traversed by a current the solenoid exhibits polarity and attraction or
repulsion, like a magnet.

||So`le*nos"to*mi (?), n. pl. [NL., from Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; a channel
||+ &?;&?;&?;&?; a mouth.] (Zoöl.) A tribe of lophobranch fishes having
||a tubular snout. The female carries the eggs in a ventral pouch.

Sole"plate` (?), n. (Mach.) (a) A bedplate; as, the soleplate of a
steam engine. (b) The plate forming the back of a waterwheel bucket.

{ So"ler (?), So"lere (?), } n. [OE. See Solar, n.] A loft or garret.
See Solar, n. Sir W. Scott.

So"lert (?), a. [L. solers, sollers, -ertis,clever, skillful.]
Skillful; clever; crafty. [Obs.] Cudworth.

So*ler"tious*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being solert. [Obs.]
Bp. Hacket.

Sole"ship (?), n. The state of being sole, or alone; soleness. [R.] Sir
E. Dering.

Sol`-fa" (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sol-faed (?);p. pr. & vb. n.
Sol-faing.] [It. solfa the gamut, from the syllables fa, sol.] To sing
the notes of the gamut, ascending or descending; as, do or ut, re, mi,
fa, sol, la, si, do, or the same in reverse order.

    Yet can I neither solfe ne sing.


Piers Plowman.

Sol"-fa", n. The gamut, or musical scale. See Tonic sol-fa, under
Tonic, n.

Sol`fa*na"ri*a (?), n. [It., from solfo sulphur.] A sulphur mine.

||Sol`fa*ta"ra (?), n.[It., from solfo brimstone, sulphur, L. sulfur,
||E. sulphur.] (Geol.) A volcanic area or vent which yields only
||sulphur vapors, steam, and the like. It represents the stages of the
||volcanic activity.

||Sol`feg*gia"re (?), v. i.[It.] (Mus.) To sol-fa. See Sol-fa, v. i.

||Sol*feg"gio (?), n.[It., fr. solfa the gamut.] (Mus.) The system of
||arranging the scale by the names do, re, mi, fa, sol, la, si, by
||which singing is taught; a singing exercise upon these syllables.

Sol`fe*ri"no (?), n. A brilliant deep pink color with a purplish tinge,
one of the dyes derived from aniline; -- so called from Solferino in
Italy, where a battle was fought about the time of its discovery.

||So"li (?), n., pl. of Solo.

So*lic"it (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Solicited; p. pr. & vb. n.
Soliciting.] [F. sollicier, L. sollicitare, solicitare, -atum, fr.
sollicitus wholly (i. e., violently) moved; sollus whole + citus, p. p.
of ciere to move, excite. See Solemn, Cite.] 1. To ask from with
earnestness; to make petition to; to apply to for obtaining something;
as, to solicit person for alms.

    Did I solicit thee From darkness to promote me?


Milton.

2. To endeavor to obtain; to seek; to plead for; as, to solicit an
office; to solicit a favor.

    I view my crime, but kindle at the view, Repent old pleasures, and
    solicit new.


Pope.

3. To awake or excite to action; to rouse desire in; to summon; to
appeal to; to invite.

    That fruit . . . solicited her longing eye.


Milton.

    Sounds and some tangible qualities solicit their proper senses, and
    force an entrance to the mind.


Locke.

4. To urge the claims of; to plead; to act as solicitor for or with
reference to. [Obs.]

    Should My brother henceforth study to forget The vow that he hath
    made thee, I would ever Solicit thy deserts.


Ford.

5. To disturb; to disquiet; -- a Latinism rarely used.

    Hath any ill solicited thine ears?


Chapman.

    But anxious fears solicit my weak breast.


Dryden.

Syn. To beseech; ask; request; crave; supplicate; entreat; beg;
implore; importune. See Beseech.

So*lic"it*ant (?), n.[L. sollicitans, p. pr. ] One who solicits.

So*lic"it*ate (?), a. Solicitous. [Obs.] Eden.

So*lic`i*ta"tion (?), n. [F. sollicitation, or L. sollicitatio.] 1. The
act of soliciting; earnest request; persistent asking; importunity.

2. Excitement; invitation; as, the solicitation of the senses. Locke.

So*lic"it*or (?), n. [F. solliciteur, L. sollicitator.] 1. One who
solicits.

2. (Law) (a) An attorney or advocate; one who represents another in
court; -- formerly, in English practice, the professional designation
of a person admitted to practice in a court of chancery or equity. See
the Note under Attorney. (b) The law officer of a city, town,
department, or government; as, the city solicitor; the solicitor of the
treasury.

So*lic"it*or-gen"er*al (?), n. The second law officer in the government
of Great Britain; also, a similar officer under the United States
government, who is associated with the attorney-general; also, the
chief law officer of some of the States.

So*lic"it*ous (?), a.[L. sollicitus, solicitus. See Solicit, v. t.]
Disposed to solicit; eager to obtain something desirable, or to avoid
anything evil; concerned; anxious; careful. "Solicitous of my
reputation." Dryden. "He was solicitous for his advice." Calerendon.

    Enjoy the present, whatsoever it be, and be not solicitous about
    the future.


Jer. Taylor.

    The colonel had been intent upon other things, and not enough
    solicitous to finish the fortifications.


Clarendon.

-- So*lic"it*ous*ly, adv. -- So*lic"it*ous*ness, n.

So*lic"it*ress (?), n. A woman who solicits.

So*lic"i*tude (?), n. [F. sollicitude,r L. sollicitudo.] The state of
being solicitous; uneasiness of mind occasioned by fear of evil or
desire good; anxiety.

    The many cares and great labors of worldly men, their solicitude
    and outward shows.


Sir W. Raleigh.

    The mother looked at her with fond solicitude.


G. W. Cable.

Syn. -- Carefulness; concern; anxiety. See Care.

<! p. 1369 !>

Sol"id (sl"d), a. [L. solidus, probably akin to sollus whole, entire,
Gr. &?;&?;&?;: cf. F. solide. Cf. Consolidate,Soda, Solder, Soldier,
Solemn.] 1. Having the constituent parts so compact, or so firmly
adhering, as to resist the impression or penetration of other bodies;
having a fixed form; hard; firm; compact; -- opposed to fluid and
liquid or to plastic, like clay, or to incompact, like sand.

2. Not hollow; full of matter; as, a solid globe or cone, as
distinguished from a hollow one; not spongy; dense; hence, sometimes,
heavy.

3. (Arith.) Having all the geometrical dimensions; cubic; as, a solid
foot contains 1,728 solid inches.

In this sense, cubics now generally used.

4. Firm; compact; strong; stable; unyielding; as, a solid pier; a solid
pile; a solid wall.

5. Applied to a compound word whose parts are closely united and form
an unbroken word; -- opposed to hyphened.

6. Fig.: Worthy of credit, trust, or esteem; substantial, as opposed to
frivolous or fallacious; weighty; firm; strong; valid; just; genuine.

    The solid purpose of a sincere and virtuous answer.


Milton.

    These, wanting wit, affect gravity, and go by the name of solid
    men.


Dryden.

    The genius of the Italians wrought by solid toil what the
    myth-making imagination of the Germans had projected in a poem.


J. A. Symonds.

7. Sound; not weakly; as, a solid constitution of body. I. Watts.

8. (Bot.) Of a fleshy, uniform, undivided substance, as a bulb or root;
not spongy or hollow within, as a stem.

9. (Metaph.) Impenetrable; resisting or excluding any other material
particle or atom from any given portion of space; -- applied to the
supposed ultimate particles of matter.

10. (Print.) Not having the lines separated by leads; not open.

11. United; without division; unanimous; as, the delegation is solid
for a candidate. [Polit. Cant. U.S.]

Solid angle. (Geom.) See under Angle. -- Solid color, an even color;
one not shaded or variegated. -- Solid green. See Emerald green (a),
under Green. -- Solid measure (Arith.), a measure for volumes, in which
the units are each a cube of fixed linear magnitude, as a cubic foot,
yard, or the like; thus, a foot, in solid measure, or a solid foot,
contains 1,728 solid inches. -- Solid newel (Arch.), a newel into which
the ends of winding stairs are built, in distinction from a hollow
newel. See under Hollow, a. -- Solid problem (Geom.), a problem which
can be construed geometrically, only by the intersection of a circle
and a conic section or of two conic sections. Hutton. -- Solid square
(Mil.), a square body or troops in which the ranks and files are equal.

Syn. -- Hard; firm; compact; strong; substantial; stable; sound; real;
valid; true; just; weighty; profound; grave; important. -- Solid, Hard.
These words both relate to the internal constitution of bodies; but
hardnotes a more impenetrable nature or a firmer adherence of the
component parts than solid. Hard is opposed to soft, and solid to
fluid, liquid, open, or hollow. Wood is usually solid; but some kinds
of wood are hard, and others are soft.

    Repose you there; while I [return] to this hard house, More harder
    than the stones whereof 't is raised.


Shak.

    I hear his thundering voice resound, And trampling feet than shake
    the solid ground.


Dryden.

Sol"id, n. 1. A substance that is held in a fixed form by cohesion
among its particles; a substance not fluid.

2. (Geom.) A magnitude which has length, breadth, and thickness; a part
of space bounded on all sides.

Solid of revolution. (Geom.) See Revolution, n., 5.

||Sol`i*da"go (?), n. [NL., fr. L. solidare to strengthen, unite; -- so
||called in allusion to its reputed healing qualities.] (Bot.) A genus
||of yellow- flowered composite perennial herbs; golden-rod.

Sol"i*dare (?), n. [LL. solidus. Cf. Sou.] A small piece of money.
[Obs.] Shak.

Sol`i*dar"i*ty (?), n. [F. solidarité, fr. solide. See Solid.] An
entire union or consolidation of interests and responsibilities;
fellowship; community.

    Solidarity [a word which we owe to the French Communists],
    signifies a fellowship in gain and loss, in honor and dishonor, in
    victory and defeat, a being, so to speak, all in the same boat.


Trench.

    The solidarity . . . of Breton and Welsh poetry.


M. Arnold.

Sol"i*da*ry (?), a. Having community of interests and responsibilities.

    Men are solidary, or copartners; and not isolated.


M. Arnold.

Sol"i*date (?), v. t. [L. solidatus, p. p. of solidare. See Solder.] To
make solid or firm. [Obs.] Cowley.

So*lid"i*fi`a*ble (?), a. Capable of being solidified.

So*lid`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. solidification.] Act of
solidifying, or state of being solidified.

So*lid"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Solidified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Solidifying (?).] [Solid + -fy: cf. F. solidifier.] To make solid or
compact.

    Every machine is a solidified mechanical theorem.


H. Spencer.

So*lid"i*fy, v. i. To become solid; to harden.

Sol"id*ism (?), n. (Med.) The doctrine that refers all diseases to
morbid changes of the solid parts of the body. It rests on the view
that the solids alone are endowed with vital properties, and can
receive the impression of agents tending to produce disease.

Sol"id*ist, n. (Med.) An advocate of, or believer in, solidism.
Dunglison.

So*lid"i*ty (?), n. [L. soliditas: cf. F. solidité.] 1. The state or
quality of being solid; density; consistency, -- opposed to fluidity;
compactness; fullness of matter, -- opposed to openness or hollowness;
strength; soundness, -- opposed to weakness or instability; the primary
quality or affection of matter by which its particles exclude or resist
all others; hardness; massiveness.

    That which hinders the approach of two bodies when they are moving
    one toward another, I call solidity.


Locke.

2. Moral firmness; soundness; strength; validity; truth; certainty; --
as opposed to weakness or fallaciousness; as, the solidity of arguments
or reasoning; the solidity of principles, triuths, or opinions.

3. (Geom.) The solid contents of a body; volume; amount of inclosed
space.

Syn. -- Firmness; solidness; hardness; density; compactness; strength;
soundness; validity; certainty.

Sol"id*ly (?), adv. In a solid manner; densely; compactly; firmly;
truly.

Sol"id*ness, n. 1. State or quality of being solid; firmness;
compactness; solidity, as of material bodies.

2. Soundness; strength; truth; validity, as of arguments, reasons,
principles, and the like.

||Sol`id*un"gu*la (?), n. pl. [NL., from L. solidus solid + ungula a
||hoof.] (Zoöl.) A tribe of ungulates which includes the horse, ass,
||and related species, constituting the family Equidæ.

Sol`id*un"gu*lar (?), a. (Zoöl.) Solipedous.

Sol`id*un"gu*late (?), n. [Solid + ungulate.] (Zool.) Same as Soliped.

Sol`id*un"gu*lous (?), a. (Zoöl.) Solipedous.

Sol`i*fid"i*an (?), n. [L. solus alone + fides faith.] (Eccl.) One who
maintains that faith alone, without works, is sufficient for
justification; -- opposed to nullifidian. Hammond.

Sol`i*fid"i*an, a. Holding the tenets of Solifidians; of or pertaining
to the solifidians.

Sol`i*fid"i*an*ism, n. The state of Solifidians.

Sol"i*form (?), a. [L. sol sun + -form.] Like the sun in form,
appearance, or nature; resembling the sun. [R.] "Soliform things."
Cudworth.

||So*lif"u*gæ (?), n. pl. [NL., from L. solifuga (better solipuga), a
||kind of venomous ant, or spider.] (Zoöl.) A division of arachnids
||having large, powerful fangs and a segmented abdomen; -- called also
||Solpugidea, and Solpugides.

So*lil"o*quize (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Soliloquized (#); p. pr. & vb.
n. Soliloquizing (#).] To utter a soliloquy; to talk to one's self.

So*lil"o*quy (?), n.; pl. Soliloquies (#). [L. soliloquium; solus alone
+ loqui to speak. See Sole ly, and Loquacious.] 1. The act of talking
to one's self; a discourse made by one in solitude to one's self;
monologue.

    Lovers are always allowed the comfort of soliloquy.


Spectator.

2. A written composition, reciting what it is supposed a person says to
himself.

    The whole poem is a soliloquy.


Prior.

Sol"i*ped (?), n. [Cf. F. solipède, It. solipede, Sp. solipedo;
apparently fr. L. solus alone + pes, pedis, a foot; but probably fr. L.
solidipes solid-footed, whole-hoofed. See Solid, and Pedal.] (Zoöl.) A
mammal having a single hoof on each foot, as the horses and asses; a
solidungulate. [Written also solipede.]

    The solipeds, or firm-hoofed animals, as horses, asses, and mules,
    etc., -- they are, also, in mighty number.


Sir T. Browne.

So*lip"e*dous (?), a. Having single hoofs.

So*lip"sism (?), n. [L. solus alone + ipse self.] 1. (Ethics) Egotism.
Krauth-Fleming.

2. (Metaph.) Egoism. Krauth- Fleming.

Sol`i*se"qui*ous (?), a. [L. sol sun + sequi to follow.] Following the
course of the sun; as, solisequious plants. [R.] Sir T. Browne.

Sol`i*taire" (?), n. [F. See Solitary.] 1. A person who lives in
solitude; a recluse; a hermit. Pope.

2. A single diamond in a setting; also, sometimes, a precious stone of
any kind set alone.

    Diamond solitaires blazing on his breast and wrists.


Mrs. R. H. Davis.

3. A game which one person can play alone; -- applied to many games of
cards, etc.; also, to a game played on a board with pegs or balls, in
which the object is, beginning with all the places filled except one,
to remove all but one of the pieces by "jumping," as in draughts.

4. (Zoöl.) (a) A large extinct bird (Pezophaps solitaria) which
formerly inhabited the islands of Mauritius and Rodrigeuz. It was
larger and taller than the wild turkey. Its wings were too small for
flight. Called also solitary. (b) Any species of American thrushlike
birds of the genus Myadestes. They are noted their sweet songs and
retiring habits. Called also fly-catching thrush. A West Indian species
(Myadestes sibilans) is called the invisible bird.

Sol`i*ta"ri*an (?), n. [See Solitary.] A hermit; a solitary. [Obs.] Sir
R. Twisden.

Sol`i*ta*ri"e*ty (?), n. The state of being solitary; solitariness.
[Obs.] Cudworth.

Sol"i*ta*ri*ly (?), adv. In a solitary manner; in solitude; alone. Mic.
vii. 14.

Sol"i*ta*ri*ness, n. Condition of being solitary.

Sol"i*ta*ry (?), a. [L. solitarius, fr. solus alone: cf. F. solitaire.
See Sole, a., and cf. Solitaire.] 1. Living or being by one's self;
having no companion present; being without associates; single; alone;
lonely.

    Those rare and solitary, these in flocks.


Milton.

    Hie home unto my chamber, Where thou shalt find me, sad and
    solitary.


Shak.

2. Performed, passed, or endured alone; as, a solitary journey; a
solitary life.

    Satan . . . explores his solitary flight.


Milton.

3. Not much visited or frequented; remote from society; retired;
lonely; as, a solitary residence or place.

4. Not inhabited or occupied; without signs of inhabitants or
occupation; desolate; deserted; silent; still; hence, gloomy; dismal;
as, the solitary desert.

    How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people.


Lam. i. 1.

    Let that night be solitary; let no joyful voice come therein.


Job iii. 7.

5. Single; individual; sole; as, a solitary instance of vengeance; a
solitary example.

6. (Bot.) Not associated with others of the same kind.

Solitary ant (Zoöl.), any solitary hymenopterous insect of the family
Mutillidæ. The female of these insects is destitute of wings and has a
powerful sting. The male is winged and resembles a wasp. Called also
spider ant. -- Solitary bee (Zoöl.), any species of bee which does not
form communities. -- Solitary sandpiper (Zoöl.), an American tattler
(Totanus solitarius). -- Solitary snipe (Zoöl.), the great snipe.
[Prov. Eng.] -- Solitary thrush (Zoöl.) the starling. [Prov. Eng.]

Sol"i*ta*ry (?), n. One who lives alone, or in solitude; an anchoret; a
hermit; a recluse.

Sol"i*tude (?), n. [F., from L. solitudo, solus alone. See Sole, a.] 1.
state of being alone, or withdrawn from society; a lonely life;
loneliness.

    Whosoever is delighted with solitude is either a wild beast or a
    god.


Bacon.

    O Solitude! where are the charms That sages have seen in thy face?


Cowper.

2. Remoteness from society; destitution of company; seclusion; -- said
of places; as, the solitude of a wood.

    The solitude of his little parish is become matter of great comfort
    to him.


Law.

3. solitary or lonely place; a desert or wilderness.

    In these deep solitudes and awful cells Where heavenly pensive
    contemplation dwells.


Pope.

Syn. Loneliness; soitariness; loneness; retiredness; recluseness. --
Solitude, Retirement, Seclusion, Loneliness. Retirement is a withdrawal
from general society, implying that a person has been engaged in its
scenes. Solitude describes the fact that a person is alone; seclusion,
that he is shut out from others, usually by his own choice; loneliness,
that he feels the pain and oppression of being alone. Hence, retirement
is opposed to a gay, active, or public life; solitude, to society;
seclusion, to freedom of access on the part of others; and loneliness,
enjoyment of that society which the heart demands.

    O blest retirement, friend to life's decline.


Goldsmith.

    Such only can enjoy the country who are capable of thinking when
    they are there; then they are prepared for solitude; and in that
    [the country] solitude is prepared for them.


Dryden.

    It is a place of seclusion from the external world.


Bp. Horsley.

    These evils . . . seem likely to reduce it [a city] ere long to the
    loneliness and the insignificance of a village.


Eustace.

So*liv"a*gant (?), a. [L. solus alone + vagans wandering.] Wandering
alone. [R.] T. Grander.

So*liv"a*gous (?), a. [L. solivagus.] Solivagant.

Sol"lar (?), n. 1. See Solar, n. [Obs.]

2. (Mining) A platform in a shaft, especially one of those between the
series of ladders in a shaft.

Sol"lar, v. t. To cover, or provide with, a sollar.

Sol"lein (?), a. Sullen; sad. [Obs.] Spenser.

Sol*ler*et" (?), n. [F. soleretim. fr. OF. soler shoe.] A flexible
steel shoe (or one of the plates forming such a shoe), worn with
mediæval armor.

Sol`mi*za"tion (?), n. [F. solmisation, fr. solmiser to sol-fa; --
called from the musical notes sol, mi. See Sol-fa.] (Mus.) The act of
sol-faing. [Written also solmisation.]

This art was practiced by the Greeks; but six of the seven syllables
now in use are generally attributed to Guido d' Arezzo, an Italian monk
of the eleventh century, who is said to have taken them from the first
syllables of the first six lines of the following stanza of a monkish
hymn to St. John the Baptist. --

    Ut queant laxis Resonare fibris Mira gestorum Famuli tuorum Solve
    polluti Labii reatum, Sancte Joannes.


Professor Skeat says the name of the seventh note, si, was also formed
by him [Guido] from the initials of the two words of the last line; but
this is disputed, Littré attributing the first use of it to Anselm of
Flanders long afterwards. The syllable do is often substituted for ut.

So"lo (?), n.; pl. E. Solos (#), It. Soli (#). [It., from L. solus
alone. See Sole, a.] (Mus.) A tune, air, strain, or a whole piece,
played by a single person on an instrument, or sung by a single voice.

So"lo*ist, n. (Mus.) One who sings or plays a solo.

Sol"o*mon (?), n. One of the kings of Israel, noted for his superior
wisdom and magnificent reign; hence, a very wise man. -- Sol`o*mon"ic
(#), a.

Solomon's seal (Bot.), a perennial liliaceous plant of the genus
Polygonatum, having simple erect or curving stems rising from thick and
knotted rootstocks, and with white or greenish nodding flowers. The
commonest European species is Polygonatum multiflorum. P. biflorum and
P. giganteum are common in the Eastern United States. See Illust. of
Rootstock. -- False Solomon's seal (Bot.), any plant of the liliaceous
genus Smilacina having small whitish flowers in terminal racemes or
panicles.

So"lon (?), n. A celebrated Athenian lawmaker, born about 638 b. c.;
hence, a legislator; a publicist; -- often used ironically.

Sol*pu"gid (?), a. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Solifugæ. -- n. One
of the Solifugæ.

||Sol`pu*gid"e*a (?), n. pl. [NL. See Solifugæ.] (Zoöl.) Same as
||Solifugæ.

Sol"stice (?), n.[L. solstitium; sol the sun + sistere to cause to
stand, akin to stare to stand: cf. F. solstice. See Solar, a., Stand,
v. i.] 1. A stopping or standing still of the sun. [Obs.] Sir T.
Browne.

2. (Astron.) (a) The point in the ecliptic at which the sun is farthest
from the equator, north or south, namely, the first point of the sign
Cancer and the first point of the sign Capricorn, the former being the
summer solstice, latter the winter solstice, in northern latitudes; --
so called because the sun then apparently stands still in its northward
or southward motion. (b) The time of the sun's passing the solstices,
or solstitial points, namely, about June 21 and December 21. See
Illust. in Appendix.

<! p. 1370 pr=RH !>

Sol*sti"tial (?), a. [L. solstitialis: cf. F. solsticial.] 1. Of or
pertaining to a solstice.

2. Happening at a solstice; esp. (with reference to the northern
hemisphere), happening at the summer solstice, or midsummer.
"Solstitial summer's heat." Milton.

Sol`u*bil"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. solubilité.] 1. The quality, condition,
or degree of being soluble or solvable; as, the solubility of a salt;
the solubility of a problem or intricate difficulty.

2. (Bot.) The tendency to separate readily into parts by spurious
articulations, as the pods of tick trefoil.

Sol"u*ble (?), a. [L. solubilis, fr. solvere, solutum, to loosen, to
dissolve: cf. F. soluble. See Solve, and cf. Solvable.] 1. Susceptible
of being dissolved in a fluid; capable of solution; as, some substances
are soluble in alcohol which are not soluble in water.

    Sugar is . . . soluble in water and fusible in fire.


Arbuthnot.

2. Susceptible of being solved; as, a soluble algebraic problem;
susceptible of being disentangled, unraveled, or explained; as, the
mystery is perhaps soluble. "More soluble is this knot." Tennyson.

3. Relaxed; open or readily opened. [R.] "The bowels must be kept
soluble." Dunglison.

Soluble glass. (Chem.) See under Glass.

Sol"u*ble*ness, n. Quality or state of being soluble.

{ ||So"lus (?), masc. a., So"la (?), fem. a. } [L.] Alone; -- chiefly
used in stage directions, and the like.

So*lute" (?), a. [L. solutus, p. p. of solvere to loosen. See Solve.]
1. Loose; free; liberal; as, a solute interpretation. [Obs.] Bacon.

2. Relaxed; hence; merry; cheerful. [R.]

    A brow solute, and ever-laughing eye.


Young.

3. Soluble; as, a solute salt. [Obs.]

4. (Bot.) Not adhering; loose; -- opposed to adnate; as, a solute
stipule.

So*lute", v. t. 1. To dissolve; to resolve. [Obs.]

2. To absolve; as, to solute sin. [Obs.] Bale.

So*lu"tion (s*l"shn), n. [OE. solucion, OF. solucion, F. solution, fr.
L. solutio, fr. solvere, solutum, to loosen, dissolve. See Solve.] 1.
The act of separating the parts of any body, or the condition of
undergoing a separation of parts; disruption; breach.

    In all bodies there is an appetite of union and evitation of
    solution of continuity.


Bacon.

2. The act of solving, or the state of being solved; the
disentanglement of any intricate problem or difficult question;
explanation; clearing up; -- used especially in mathematics, either of
the process of solving an equation or problem, or the result of the
process.

3. The state of being dissolved or disintegrated; resolution;
disintegration.

    It is unquestionably an enterprise of more promise to assail the
    nations in their hour of faintness and solution, than at a time
    when magnificent and seductive systems of worship were at their
    height of energy and splendor.


I. Taylor.

4. (Chem.Phys.) The act or process by which a body (whether solid,
liquid, or gaseous) is absorbed into a liquid, and, remaining or
becoming fluid, is diffused throughout the solvent; also, the product
resulting from such absorption.

When a solvent will not take in any more of a substance the solution is
said to be saturated. Solution is of two kinds; viz.: (a) Mechanical
solution, in which no marked chemical change takes place, and in which,
in the case of solids, the dissolved body can be regained by
evaporation, as in the solution of salt or sugar in water. (b) Chemical
solution, in which there is involved a decided chemical change, as when
limestone or zinc undergoes solution in hydrochloric acid. Mechanical
solution is regarded as a form of molecular or atomic attraction, and
is probably occasioned by the formation of certain very weak and
unstable compounds which are easily dissociated and pass into new and
similar compounds.

This word is not used in chemistry or mineralogy for fusion, or the
melting of bodies by the heat of fire.

5. Release; deliverance; discharge. [Obs.] Barrow.

6. (Med.) (a) The termination of a disease; resolution. (b) A crisis.
(c) A liquid medicine or preparation (usually aqueous) in which the
solid ingredients are wholly soluble. U. S. Disp.

Fehling's solution (Chem.), a standardized solution of cupric hydrate
in sodium potassium tartrate, used as a means of determining the
reducing power of certain sugars and sirups by the amount of red
cuprous oxide thrown down. -- Heavy solution (Min.), a liquid of high
density, as a solution of mercuric iodide in potassium iodide (called
the Sonstadt or Thoulet solution) having a maximum specific gravity of
3.2, or of borotungstate of cadmium (Klein solution, specific gravity
3.6), and the like. Such solutions are much used in determining the
specific gravities of minerals, and in separating them when
mechanically mixed as in a pulverized rock. -- Nessler's solution. See
Nesslerize. -- Solution of continuity, the separation of connection, or
of connected substances or parts; -- applied, in surgery, to a
fracture, laceration, or the like. "As in the natural body a wound, or
solution of continuity, is worse than a corrupt humor, so in the
spiritual." Bacon. -- Standardized solution (Chem.), a solution which
is used as a reagent, and is of a known and standard strength;
specifically, a normal solution, containing in each cubic centimeter as
many milligrams of the element in question as the number representing
its atomic weight; thus, a normal solution of silver nitrate would
contain 107.7 mgr. of silver in each cubic centimeter.

Sol"u*tive (sl"*tv), a. [Cf. F. solutif.] Tending to dissolve;
loosening; laxative. Bacon.

Solv`a*bil"i*ty (?), n. [F. solvabilité.] 1. The quality or state of
being solvable; as, the solvability of a difficulty; the solvability of
a problem.

2. The condition of being solvent; ability to pay all just debts;
solvency; as, the solvability of a merchant.

Solv"a*ble (?), a. [F. solvable. See Solve, and cf. Soluble, Solvible.]
1. Susceptible of being solved, resolved, or explained; admitting of
solution.

2. Capable of being paid and discharged; as, solvable obligations.
Tooke.

3. Able to pay one's debts; solvent. [Obs.] Fuller.

Solv"a*ble*ness (?), n. Quality of being solvable.

Solve (slv), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Solved (slvd); p. pr. & vb. n.
Solving.] [L. solvere, solutum; from a prefix so- expressing separation
(cf. Sober) + luere to loosen; cf. OF. soldre, soudre. See Loose, and
cf. Absolve.] To explain; to resolve; to unfold; to clear up (what is
obscure or difficult to be understood); to work out to a result or
conclusion; as, to solve a doubt; to solve difficulties; to solve a
problem.

    True piety would effectually solve such scruples.


South.

    God shall solve the dark decrees of fate.


Tickell.

Syn. -- To explain; resolve; unfold; clear up.

Solve, n. A solution; an explanation. [Obs.] Shak.

Sol"ven*cy (sl"ven*s), n. [See Solvent.] The quality or state of being
solvent.

Sol"vend (sl"vnd), n. [L. solvendus to be loosened or dissolved, fr.
solvere. See Solution.] A substance to be dissolved. [R.]

Sol"vent (sl"vent), a. [L. solvens, p. pr. of solvere. See Solvable.]
1. Having the power of dissolving; dissolving; as, a solvent fluid.
"The solvent body." Boyle.

2. Able or sufficient to pay all just debts; as, a solvent merchant;
the estate is solvent.

Sol"vent, n. (Chem.) A substance (usually liquid) suitable for, or
employed in, solution, or in dissolving something; as, water is the
appropriate solvent of most salts, alcohol of resins, ether of fats,
and mercury or acids of metals, etc.

2. That which resolves; as, a solvent of mystery.

Sol"ver (slv"r), n. One who, or that which, solves.

Solv"i*ble (-*b'l), a. See Solvable.

Sol"y (sl"), adv. Solely. [Obs.] Spenser.

||So"ma (s"m), n. [NL., fr. Gr. sw^ma, sw`matos, the body.] (Anat.) The
||whole axial portion of an animal, including the head, neck, trunk,
||and tail. B. G. Wilder.

{ So"maj" (s*mäj"), Sa*maj" (s*mäj") }, n. A society; a congregation, a
worshiping assembly, or church, esp. of the Brahmo- somaj. [India]

{ So*ma"li (s*mä"l), So*mal" (s*mäl") }, n. (Ethnol.) A Hamitic people
of East Central Africa.

So*mat"ic (s*mt"k), a. [Gr. swmatiko`s, fr. sw^ma the body.] 1. Of or
pertaining to the body as a whole; corporeal; as, somatic death;
somatic changes.

2. Of or pertaining to the wall of the body; somatopleuric; parietal;
as, the somatic stalk of the yolk sac of an embryo.

Somatic death. See the Note under Death, n., 1.

So*mat"ic*al (?), a. Somatic.

So*mat"ics (?), n. The science which treats of the general properties
of matter; somatology.

So"ma*tist (?), n. One who admits the existence of material beings
only; a materialist. Glanvill.

So"ma*to*cyst (?), n. [Gr. sw^ma, sw`matos, body + ky`stis a bladder.]
(Zoöl.) A cavity in the primary nectocalyx of certain Siphonophora. See
Illust. under Nectocalyx.

So`ma*tol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. sw^ma, sw`matos, body + -logy.] 1. The
doctrine or the science of the general properties of material
substances; somatics.

2. A treatise on the human body; anatomy. Dunglison.

So"ma*tome (?), n. [Gr. sw^ma, body + te`mnein to cut.] (Anat. & Zoöl.)
See Somite.

So"ma*to*pleure (?), n. [Gr. sw^ma, sw`matos, body + pleyra` side.]
(Anat.) The outer, or parietal, one of the two lamellæ into which the
vertebrate blastoderm divides on either side of the notochord, and from
which the walls of the body and the amnion are developed. See
Splanchnopleure.

So`ma*to*pleu"ric (?), a. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the somatopleure.

So`ma*tot"ro*pism (?), n. [Gr. sw^ma, sw`matos, the body + tre`pein to
turn.] (Physiol.) A directive influence exercised by a mass of matter
upon growing organs. Encyc. Brit.

{ Som"ber, Som"bre } (?; 277), a. [F. sombre; cf. Sp. sombra, shade,
prob. from LL. subumbrare to put in the shade; L. sub under + umbra
shade. See Umbrage.] 1. Dull; dusky; somewhat dark; gloomy; as, a
somber forest; a somber house.

2. Melancholy; sad; grave; depressing; as, a somber person; somber
reflections.

    The dinner was silent and somber; happily it was also short.


Beaconsfield.

{ Som"ber, Som"bre }, v. t. To make somber, or dark; to make shady.
[R.]

{ Som"ber, Som"bre }, n. Gloom; obscurity; duskiness; somberness.
[Obs.]

{ Som"ber*ly, Som"bre*ly }, adv. In a somber manner; sombrously;
gloomily; despondingly.

{ Som"ber*ness, Som"bre*ness }, n. The quality or state of being
somber; gloominess.

||Som*bre"ro (?), n. [Sp., from sombra shade. See Sombre.] A kind of
||broad-brimmed hat, worn in Spain and in Spanish America. Marryat.

Som"brous (?), a. [Cf. Sp. sombroso.] Gloomy; somber. "Tall and
sombrous pines." Longfellow.

-- Som"brous*ly, adv. -- Som"brous*ness, n.

-some (-sm). A combining form or suffix from Gr. sw^ma (gen. sw`matos)
the body; as in merosome, a body segment; cephalosome, etc.

-some (-sm). [AS. -sum; akin to G. & OHG. -sam, Icel. samr, Goth.
lustusams longed for. See Same, a., and cf. Some, a.] An adjective
suffix having primarily the sense of like or same, and indicating a
considerable degree of the thing or quality denoted in the first part
of the compound; as in mettlesome, full of mettle or spirit; gladsome,
full of gladness; winsome, blithesome, etc.

Some (sm), a. [OE. som, sum, AS. sum; akin to OS., OFries., & OHG. sum,
OD. som, D. sommig, Icel. sumr, Dan. somme (pl.), Sw. somlige (pl.),
Goth. sums, and E. same. &radic;191. See Same, a., and cf. -some.] 1.
Consisting of a greater or less portion or sum; composed of a quantity
or number which is not stated; -- used to express an indefinite
quantity or number; as, some wine; some water; some persons. Used also
pronominally; as, I have some.

    Some theoretical writers allege that there was a time when there
    was no such thing as society.


Blackstone.

2. A certain; one; -- indicating a person, thing, event, etc., as not
known individually, or designated more specifically; as, some man, that
is, some one man. "Some brighter clime." Mrs. Barbauld.

    Some man praiseth his neighbor by a wicked intent.


Chaucer.

    Most gentlemen of property, at some period or other of their lives,
    are ambitious of representing their county in Parliament.


Blackstone.

3. Not much; a little; moderate; as, the censure was to some extent
just.

4. About; near; more or less; -- used commonly with numerals, but
formerly also with a singular substantive of time or distance; as, a
village of some eighty houses; some two or three persons; some hour
hence. Shak.

    The number slain on the rebel's part were some two thousand.


Bacon.

5. Considerable in number or quantity. "Bore us some leagues to sea."
Shak.

    On its outer point, some miles away. The lighthouse lifts its
    massive masonry.


Longfellow.

6. Certain; those of one part or portion; -- in distinction from other
or others; as, some men believe one thing, and others another.

    Some [seeds] fell among thorns; . . . but other fell into good
    ground.


Matt. xiii. 7, 8.

7. A part; a portion; -- used pronominally, and followed sometimes by
of; as, some of our provisions.

    Your edicts some reclaim from sins, But most your life and blest
    example wins.


Dryden.

All and some, one and all. See under All, adv. [Obs.]

The illiterate in the United States and Scotland often use some as an
adverb, instead of somewhat, or an equivalent expression; as, I am some
tired; he is some better; it rains some, etc.

Some . . . some, one part . . . another part; these . . . those; --
used distributively.

    Some to the shores do fly, Some to the woods, or whither fear
    advised.


Daniel.

Formerly used also of single persons or things: this one . . . that
one; one . . . another.

    Some in his bed, some in the deep sea.


Chaucer.

Some"bod*y (sm"bd*), n. 1. A person unknown or uncertain; a person
indeterminate; some person.

    Jesus said, Somebody hath touched me.


Luke viii. 46.

    We must draw in somebody that may stand 'Twixt us and danger.


Denham.

2. A person of consideration or importance.

    Before these days rose up Theudas, boasting himself to be somebody.


Acts v. 36.

Some"deal` (-dl`), adv. In some degree; somewhat. [Written also sumdel,
sumdeale, and sumdele.] [Obs.] "She was somedeal deaf." Chaucer.

    Thou lackest somedeal their delight.


Spenser.

Some"how` (-hou`), adv. In one way or another; in some way not yet
known or designated; by some means; as, the thing must be done somehow;
he lives somehow.

    By their action upon one another they may be swelled somehow, so as
    to shorten the length.


Cheyne.

The indefiniteness of somehow is emphasized by the addition of or
other.

    Although youngest of the familly, he has somehow or other got the
    entire management of all the others.


Sir W. Scott.

{ Som"er*sault (?), Som"er*set (?) }, n. [F. soubresaut a jump, leap,
OF. soubresault, It. soprassalto an overleap, fr. L. supra over +
saltus a leap, fr. salire to leap; or the French may be from Sp.
sobresalto a sudden asault, a surprise. See Supra, and Salient.] A leap
in which a person turns his heels over his head and lights upon his
feet; a turning end over end. [Written also summersault, sommerset,
summerset, etc.] "The vaulter's sombersalts." Donne.

    Now I'll only Make him break his neck in doing a sommerset.


Beau. & Fl.

Some"thing (?), n. 1. Anything unknown, undetermined, or not
specifically designated; a certain indefinite thing; an indeterminate
or unknown event; an unspecified task, work, or thing.

    There is something in the wind.


Shak.

    The whole world has something to do, something to talk of,
    something to wish for, and something to be employed about.


Pope.

    Something attemped, something done, Has earned a night's repose.


Longfellow.

2. A part; a portion, more or less; an indefinite quantity or degree; a
little.

    Something yet of doubt remains.


Milton.

    Something of it arises from our infant state.


I. Watts.

3. A person or thing importance.

    If a man thinketh himself to be something, when he is nothing, he
    deceiveth himself.


Gal. vi. 3.

Some"thing, adv. In some degree; somewhat; to some extent; at some
distance. Shak.

    I something fear my father's wrath.


Shak.

    We have something fairer play than a reasoner could have expected
    formerly.


Burke.

    My sense of touch is something coarse.


Tennyson.

    It must be done to-night, And something from the palace.


Shak.

Some"time` (?), adv. 1. At a past time indefinitely referred to; once;
formerly.

    Did they not sometime cry "All hail" to me?


Shak.

2. At a time undefined; once in a while; now and then; sometimes.

    Sometime we see a cloud that's dragonish, A vapor sometime like a
    bear or lion.


Shak.

3. At one time or other hereafter; as, I will do it sometime. "Sometime
he reckon shall." Chaucer.

<! p. 1371 pr=RH !>

Some"time` (sm"tm`), a. Having been formerly; former; late; whilom.

    Our sometime sister, now our queen.


Shak.

    Ion, our sometime darling, whom we prized.


Talfourd.

Some"times` (?), adv. [Sometime + adverbial ending -s, as in -wards.]
1. Formerly; sometime. [Obs.]

    That fair and warlike form In which the majesty of buried Denmark
    Did sometimes march.


Shak.

2. At times; at intervals; not always; now and then; occasionally.

    It is good that we sometimes be contradicted.


Jer. Taylor.

Sometimes . . . sometimes, at certain times . . . at certain other
times; as, sometimes he is earnest, sometimes he is frivolous.

Some"times`, a. Former; sometime. [Obs.]

    Thy sometimes brother's wife.


Shak.

Some"what` (?), n. 1. More or less; a certain quantity or degree; a
part, more or less; something.

    These salts have somewhat of a nitrous taste.


Grew.

    Somewhat of his good sense will suffer, in this transfusion, and
    much of the beauty of his thoughts will be lost.


Dryden.

2. A person or thing of importance; a somebody.

    Here come those that worship me. They think that I am somewhat.


Tennyson.

Some"what`, adv. In some degree or measure; a little.

    His giantship is gone, somewhat crestfallen.


Milton.

    Somewhat back from the village street.


Longfellow.

Some"when`, adv. At some indefinite time. [R.]

Some"where` (?), adv. In some place unknown or not specified; in one
place or another. "Somewhere nigh at hand." Milton.

Some"while` (?), adv. Once; for a time.

    Though, under color of shepherds, somewhile There crept in wolves,
    full of fraud and guile.


Spenser.

Some"whith`er (?), adv. To some indeterminate place; to some place or
other.

    Driven by the winds of temptation somewhither.


Barrow.

So"mite (s"mt), n. [Gr. sw^ma body.] (Anat. & Zoöl.) One of the actual
or ideal serial segments of which an animal, esp. an articulate or
vertebrate, is composed; somatome; metamere. -- So*mit`ic (#), a.

||Som`meil" (?), n. [F.] Slumber; sleep.

Som"mer*set (?), n. See Somersault.

Som*nam"bu*lar (?), a. Of or pertaining to somnambulism;
somnambulistic. Mrs. Browning.

Som*nam"bu*late (?), v. i. & t. To walk when asleep.

Som*nam`bu*la"tion (?), n. [L. somnus sleep + ambulatio a walking
about, from ambulare to walk. See Somnolent, Amble.] The act of walking
in sleep.

Som*nam"bu*la`tor (?), n. A somnambulist.

Som*nam"bule (?), n. [F.] A somnambulist.

Som*nam"bu*lic (?), a. Somnambulistic.

Som*nam"bu*lism (?), n. [Cf. F. somnambulisme. See Somnambulation.] A
condition of the nervous system in which an individual during sleep
performs actions appropriate to the waking state; a state of sleep in
which some of the senses and voluntary powers are partially awake;
noctambulism.

Som*nam"bu*list (?), n. A person who is subject to somnambulism; one
who walks in his sleep; a sleepwalker; a noctambulist.

Som*nam`bu*lis"tic (?), a. Of or pertaining to a somnambulist or
somnambulism; affected by somnambulism; appropriate to the state of a
somnambulist.

    Whether this was an intentional and waking departure, or a
    somnambulistic leave-taking and walking in her sleep, may remain a
    subject of contention.


Dickens.

Som"ne (?), v. t. To summon. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Som"ner (?), n. A summoner; esp., one who summons to an ecclesiastical
court. [Obs.] Piers Plowman.

Som"ni*al (?), a. [L. somnialis dream bringing, fr. somnium dream, fr.
somnus sleep.] Of or pertaining to sleep or dreams.

    The somnial magic superinduced on, without suspending, the active
    powers of the mind.


Coleridge.

Som"ni*a*tive (?), a. Somnial; somniatory. [R.]

Som"ni*a*to*ry (?), a. Pertaining to sleep or dreams; somnial. [Obs. or
R.] Urquhart.

Som*nic"u*lous (?), a. [L. somniculosus.] Inclined to sleep; drowsy;
sleepy. [Obs.]

Som*nif"er*ous (?), a. [L. somnifer; somnus sleep + ferre to bring.]
Causing or inducing sleep; soporific; dormitive; as, a somniferous
potion. Walton.

Som*nif"ic (?), a. [L. somnificus; somnus sleep + facere to make.]
Causing sleep; somniferous.

Som*nif"u*gous (?), a. [L. somnus sleep + fugare to put to flight.]
Driving away sleep. [Obs.]

Som*nil"o*quence (?), n. The act of talking in one's sleep;
somniloquism.

Som*nil"o*quism (?), n. The act or habit of talking in one's sleep;
somniloquy. Coleridge.

Som*nil"o*quist, n. One who talks in his sleep.

Som*nil"o*quous (?), a. [L. somnus sleep + loqui to speak.] Apt to talk
in sleep.

Som*nil"o*quy (?), n. A talking in sleep; the talking of one in a state
of somnipathy. [R.] Coleridge.

Som*nip"a*thist (?), n. A person in a state of somniapathy.

Som*nip"a*thy (?), n. [L. somnus sleep + Gr. &?; a suffering of the
body, fr. &?;, &?;, to suffer.] Sleep from sympathy, or produced by
mesmerism or the like. [Written also somnopathy.]

{ Som"no*lence (?), Som"no*len*cy (?) }, n. [L. somnolentia: cf. F.
somnolence.] Sleepiness; drowsiness; inclination to sleep.

Som"no*lent (?), a. [F. somnolent, L. somnolentus, from somnus sleep,
akin to Gr. &?;, Skr. svapna sleep, dream, svap to sleep, Icel. sofa,
AS. swefn sleep. Cf. Hypnotic, Somnambulism, Soporific.] Sleepy;
drowsy; inclined to sleep. -- Som"no*lent*ly, adv.

    He had no eye for such phenomena, because he had a somnolent want
    of interest in them.


De Quincey.

Som"no*lism (?), n. The somnolent state induced by animal magnetism.
Thomas (Med. Dict.).

Som*nop"a*thy (?), n. Somnipathy.

Som"nour (?), n. A summoner; an apparitor; a sompnour. [Obs.] Piers
Plowman.

{ Som"on*aunce (?), Som"once (?) }, n. [See Summon, Summons.] A
summons; a citation. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Som"on*our (?), n. A summoner. [Obs.]

Somp"ne (? or ?), v. t. To summon; to cite. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Somp"nour (?), n. A summoner. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Son (?), n. [OE. sone, sune, AS. sunu; akin to D. zoon, OS., OFries., &
OHG. sunu, G. sohn, Icel. sonr, Sw. son, Dan. sön, Goth. sunus, Lith.
sunus, Russ. suin', Skr. snu (from s to beget, to bear), and Gr. &?;
son. &radic;293. Cf. Sow, n.] 1. A male child; the male issue, or
offspring, of a parent, father or mother.

    Sarah conceived, and bare Abraham a son.


Gen. xxi. 2.

2. A male descendant, however distant; hence, in the plural,
descendants in general.

    I am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings.


Isa. xix. 11.

    I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
    consumed.


Mal. iii. 6.

3. Any young male person spoken of as a child; an adopted male child; a
pupil, ward, or any other young male dependent.

    The child grew, and she brought him unto Pharaoh's daughter, and he
    became her son.


Ex. ii. 10.

    Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift.


Shak.

4. A native or inhabitant of some specified place; as, sons of Albion;
sons of New England.

5. The produce of anything.

    Earth's tall sons, the cedar, oak, and pine.


Blackmore.

6. (Commonly with the def. article) Jesus Christ, the Savior; -- called
the Son of God, and the Son of man.

    We . . . do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior
    of the world.


1 John iv. 14.

    Who gave His Son sure all has given.


Keble.

The expressions son of pride, sons of light, son of Belial, are
Hebraisms, which denote persons possessing the qualitites of pride, of
light, or of Belial, as children inherit the qualities of their
ancestors.

Sons of the prophets. See School of the prophets, under Prophet.

So"nance (?), n. 1. A sound; a tune; as, to sound the tucket sonance.
[Obs.] Shak.

2. The quality or state of being sonant.

So"nant (?), a. [L. sonans, - antis, p. pr. of sonare to sound. See
Sound a noise.] 1. Of or pertaining to sound; sounding.

2. (Phonetics) Uttered, as an element of speech, with tone or proper
vocal sound, as distinguished from mere breath sound; intonated;
voiced; vocal; tonic; the opposite of nonvocal, or surd; -- said of the
vowels, semivowels, liquids, and nasals, and particularly of the
consonants b, d, g hard, v, etc., as compared with their cognates p, t,
k, f, etc., which are called nonvocal, surd, or aspirate. -- n. A
sonant letter.

So*na"ta (?), n. [It., fr. It. & L. sonare to sound. See Sound a
noise.] (Mus.) An extended composition for one or two instruments,
consisting usually of three or four movements; as, Beethoven's sonatas
for the piano, for the violin and piano, etc.

The same general structure prevails in symphonies, instrumental trios,
quartets, etc., and even in classical concertos. The sonata form,
distinctively, characterizes the quick opening movement, which may have
a short, slow introduction; the second, or slow, movement is either in
the song or variation form; third comes the playful minuet or the more
modern scherzo; then the quick finale in the rondo form. But both form
and order are sometimes exceptional.

||So`na*ti"na (?), n. [It.] (Mus.) A short and simple sonata.

{ Son"cy, Son"sy (?) }, a. [Scot. sonce, sons, prosperity, happiness,
fr. Gael. & Ir. sonas.] Lucky; fortunate; thriving; plump. [Prov. Eng.
& Scot.]

{ Sond (?), Sonde }, n. [AS. sand. See Send, v. t.] That which is sent;
a message or messenger; hence, also, a visitation of providence; an
affliction or trial. [Obs.]

    Ye have enough, parde, of Goddes sond.


Chaucer.

||Son"de*li (?), n. (Zoöl.) The musk shrew. See under Musk.

Song (sng; 115), n. [AS. song, sang, fr. singan to sing; akin to D.
zang, G. sang, Icel. söngr, Goth. saggws. See Sing.] 1. That which is
sung or uttered with musical modulations of the voice, whether of a
human being or of a bird, insect, etc. "That most ethereal of all
sounds, the song of crickets." Hawthorne.

2. A lyrical poem adapted to vocal music; a ballad.

3. More generally, any poetical strain; a poem.

    The bard that first adorned our native tongue Tuned to his British
    lyre this ancient song.


Dryden.

4. Poetical composition; poetry; verse.

    This subject for heroic song.


Milton.

5. An object of derision; a laughingstock.

    And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword.


Job xxx. 9.

6. A trifle. "The soldier's pay is a song." Silliman.

Old song, a trifle; nothing of value. "I do not intend to be thus put
off with an old song." Dr. H. More. -- Song bird (Zoöl.), any singing
bird; one of the Oscines. -- Song sparrow (Zoöl.), a very common North
American sparrow (Melospiza fasciata, or M. melodia) noted for the
sweetness of its song in early spring. Its breast is covered with dusky
brown streaks which form a blotch in the center. -- Song thrush
(Zoöl.), a common European thrush (Turdus musicus), noted for its
melodius song; -- called also mavis, throstle, and thrasher.

Syn. -- Sonnet; ballad; canticle; carol; canzonet; ditty; hymn;
descant; lay; strain; poesy; verse.

Song"craft` (sng"krft`), n. The art of making songs or verses; metrical
composition; versification.

    A half-effaced inscription, Written with little skill of songcraft.


Longfellow.

Song"ful (-fl), a. Disposed to sing; full of song.

Song"ish, a. Consisting of songs. [R.] Dryden.

Song"less, a. Destitute of the power of song; without song; as,
songless birds; songless woods.

Song"ster (-str), n. [AS. sangestre a female singer.] 1. One who sings;
one skilled in singing; -- not often applied to human beings.

2. (Zoöl.) A singing bird.

Song"stress (?), n. [See Songster, and -ess.] A woman who sings; also,
a female singing bird. Thomson.

Son"i*fer (?), n. [NL. See Soniferous.] A kind of ear trumpet for the
deaf, or the partially deaf.

So*nif"er*ous (?), a. [L. sonus sound + -ferous.] Sounding; producing
sound; conveying sound.

Son`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [L. sonus sound + -ficare (in comp.) to make.
See - fy.] The act of producing sound, as the stridulation of insects.

Son"-in-law` (?), n.; pl. Sons-in-law (&?;). The husband of one's
daughter; a man in his relationship to his wife's parents.

    To take me as for thy son in lawe.


Chaucer.

Son"less, a. Being without a son. Marston.

    As no baron who was sonless could give a husband to his daughter,
    save with his lord's consent.


J. R. Green.

Son"net (?), n. [F., fr. It. sonetto, fr. suono a sound, a song, fr. L.
sonus a sound. See Sound noise.] 1. A short poem, -- usually amatory.
[Obs.] Shak.

    He had a wonderful desire to chant a sonnet or hymn unto Apollo
    Pythius.


Holland.

2. A poem of fourteen lines, -- two stanzas, called the octave, being
of four verses each, and two stanzas, called the sestet, of three
verses each, the rhymes being adjusted by a particular rule.

In the proper sonnet each line has five accents, and the octave has but
two rhymes, the second, third, sixth, and seventh lines being of one
rhyme, and the first, fourth, fifth, and eighth being of another. In
the sestet there are sometimes two and sometimes three rhymes; but in
some way its two stazas rhyme together. Often the three lines of the
first stanza rhyme severally with the three lines of the second. In
Shakespeare's sonnets, the first twelve lines are rhymed alternately,
and the last two rhyme together.

Son"net, v. i. To compose sonnets. "Strains that come almost to
sonneting." Milton.

Son`net*eer" (?), n. A composer of sonnets, or small poems; a small
poet; -- usually in contempt.

    What woful stuff this madrigal would be In some starved hackney
    sonneteer or me!


Pope.

Son`net*eer", v. i. To compose sonnets. Lowell.

Son"net*er (?), n. A composer of sonnets.

Son"net*ist, n. A sonneter, or sonneteer. Bp. Hall.

Son"net*ize (?), v. i. To compose sonnets.

Son"nish (?), a. Like the sun; sunny; golden. [Obs.] "Her sonnish
hairs." Chaucer.

Son"nite (?), n. See Sunnite.

So*nom"e*ter (?), n. [L. sonus a sound + -meter.] 1. (Physiol.) An
instrument for exhibiting the transverse vibrations of cords, and
ascertaining the relations between musical notes. It consists of a cord
stretched by weight along a box, and divided into different lengths at
pleasure by a bridge, the place of which is determined by a scale on
the face of the box.

2. An instrument for testing the hearing capacity.

Son`o*rif"ic (?), a. [L. sonor, -oris, a sound + facere to make. See
Sonorous.] Producing sound; as, the sonorific quality of a body. [R.]
I. Watts.

So*nor"i*ty (?), n. [L. sonoritas.] The quality or state of being
sonorous; sonorousness.

So*no"rous (?), a. [L. sonorus, fr. sonor, -oris, a sound, akin to
sonus a sound. See Sound.] 1. Giving sound when struck; resonant; as,
sonorous metals.

2. Loud-sounding; giving a clear or loud sound; as, a sonorous voice.

3. Yielding sound; characterized by sound; vocal; sonant; as, the
vowels are sonorous.

4. Impressive in sound; high- sounding.

    The Italian opera, amidst all the meanness and familiarty of the
    thoughts, has something beautiful and sonorous in the expression.


Addison.

    There is nothing of the artificial Johnsonian balance in his style.
    It is as often marked by a pregnant brevity as by a sonorous
    amplitude.


E. Everett.

5. (Med.) Sonant; vibrant; hence, of sounds produced in a cavity,
deep-toned; as, sonorous rhonchi.

Sonorous figures (Physics), figures formed by the vibrations of a
substance capable of emitting a musical tone, as when the bow of a
violin is drawn along the edge of a piece of glass or metal on which
sand is strewed, and the sand arranges itself in figures according to
the musical tone. Called also acoustic figures. -- Sonorous tumor
(Med.), a tumor which emits a clear, resonant sound on percussion.

-- So*no"rous*ly, adv. -- So*no"rous*ness, n.

Son"ship (?), n. The state of being a son, or of bearing the relation
of a son; filiation. Dr. H. More.

Son"sy (?), a. See Soncy. [Scot.] Burns.

Son"tag (?), n. [So called from from Mme. Henriette Sontag, a famous
singer.] A knitted worsted jacket, worn over the waist of a woman's
dress.

<! p. 1372 !>

Son"ties (?), n. Probably from "saintes" saints, or from sanctities; --
used as an oath. [Obs.] Shak.

Soo*chong" (?), n. Same as Souchong.

||Soo"dra (?). Same as Sudra.

{ Soo"fee (?), Soo"fee*ism (?) }. Same as Sufi, Sufism.

Soo"jee (?), n. Same as Suji.

Soon (?), adv. [OE. sone, AS. s&?;na; cf. OFries. s&?;n, OS. sna, sno,
OHG. sr, Goth. suns.] 1. In a short time; shortly after any time
specified or supposed; as, soon after sunrise. "Sooner said than done."
Old Proverb. "As soon as it might be." Chaucer.

    She finished, and the subtle fiend his lore Soon learned.


Milton.

2. Without the usual delay; before any time supposed; early.

    How is it that ye are come so soon to- day?


Ex. ii. 18.

3. Promptly; quickly; easily.

    Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide.


Shak.

4. Readily; willingly; -- in this sense used with would, or some other
word expressing will.

    I would as soon see a river winding through woods or in meadows, as
    when it is tossed up in so many whimsical figures at Versailles.


Addison.

As soon as, or So soon as, immediately at or after another event. "As
soon as he came nigh unto the camp . . . he saw the calf, and the
dancing." Ex. xxxii. 19. See So . . . as, under So. -- Soon at, as soon
as; or, as soon as the time referred to arrives. [Obs.] "I shall be
sent for soon at night." Shak. -- Sooner or later, at some uncertain
time in the future; as, he will discover his mistake sooner or later.
-- With the soonest, as soon as any; among the earliest; too soon.
[Obs.] Holland.

Soon, a. Speedy; quick. [Obs.] Shak.

Soo"nee (?), n. See Sunnite.

Soon"ly (?), adv. Soon. [Obs.] Dr. H. More.

Soord (?), n. Skin of bacon. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

Soor"ma (?), n. [Hind. & Per. surma.] A preparation of antimony with
which Mohammedan men anoint their eyelids.

Soo*shong" (?), n. See Souchong.

Soo"soo (?), n. (Zoöl.) A kind of dolphin (Platanista Gangeticus)
native of the river Ganges; the Gangetic dolphin. It has a long,
slender, somewhat spatulate beak. [Written also susu.]

Soot (? or ?; 277), n. [OE. sot, AS. s&?;t; akin to Icel. s&?;t, Sw.
sot, Dan. sod, OD. soet, Lith. s&?;dis; cf. Gael. suith, Ir. suth.] A
black substance formed by combustion, or disengaged from fuel in the
process of combustion, which rises in fine particles, and adheres to
the sides of the chimney or pipe conveying the smoke; strictly, the
fine powder, consisting chiefly of carbon, which colors smoke, and
which is the result of imperfect combustion. See Smoke.

Soot, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sooted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sooting.] To cover or
dress with soot; to smut with, or as with, soot; as, to soot land.
Mortimer.

{ Soot (?), Soot"e (?) }, a. [See Sweet.] Sweet. [Obs.] "The soote
savour of the vine." Chaucer.

Soot"er*kin (?), n. [Cf. Prov. G. suttern to boil gently.] A kind of
false birth, fabled to be produced by Dutch women from sitting over
their stoves; also, an abortion, in a figurative sense; an abortive
scheme.

    Fruits of dull heat, and sooterkins of wit.


Pope.

Sooth (sth), a.; also adv. [Compar. Soother (sth"r); superl. Soothest.]
[OE. soth, AS. sð, for sanð; akin to OS. sð, OHG. sand, Icel. sannr,
Sw. sann, Dan. sand, Skr. sat, sant, real, genuine, present, being;
properly p. pr. from a root meaning, to be, Skr. as, L. esse; also akin
to Goth. sunjis true, Gr. 'eteo`s, Skr. satya. &radic;9. Cf. Absent,
Am, Essence, Is, Soothe, Sutee.] 1. True; faithful; trustworthy. [Obs.
or Scot.]

    The sentence [meaning] of it sooth is, out of doubt.


Chaucer.

    That shall I sooth (said he) to you declare.


Spensser.

2. Pleasing; delightful; sweet. [R.]

    The soothest shepherd that ever piped on plains.


Milton.

    With jellies soother than the creamy curd.


Keats.

Sooth, n. [AS. sð. See Sooth, a.] 1. Truth; reality. [Archaic]

    The sooth it this, the cut fell to the knight.


Chaucer.

    In sooth, I know not why I am so sad.


Shak.

    In good sooth, Its mystery is love, its meaninng youth.


Longfellow.

2. Augury; prognostication. [Obs.]

    The soothe of birds by beating of their wings.


Spenser.

3. Blandishment; cajolery. [Obs.] Shak.

Soothe (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soothed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Soothing.]
[Originally, to assent to as true; OE. so&?;ien to verify, AS.
ges&?;&?;ian to prove the truth of, to bear witness. See Sooth, a.] 1.
To assent to as true. [Obs.] Testament of Love.

2. To assent to; to comply with; to gratify; to humor by compliance; to
please with blandishments or soft words; to flatter.

    Good, my lord, soothe him, let him take the fellow.


Shak.

    I've tried the force of every reason on him, Soothed and caressed,
    been angry, soothed again.


Addison.

3. To assuage; to mollify; to calm; to comfort; as, to soothe a crying
child; to soothe one's sorrows.

    Music hath charms to soothe the savage breast, To soften rocks, or
    bend a knotted oak.


Congreve.

    Though the sound of Fame May for a moment soothe, it can not slake
    The fever of vain longing.


Byron.

Syn. -- To soften; assuage; allay; compose; mollify; tranquilize;
pacify; mitigate.

Sooth"er (?), n. One who, or that which, soothes.

Sooth"fast` (?), a. [Sooth + fast, that is, fast or firm with respect
to truth.] Firmly fixed in, or founded upon, the thruth; true; genuine;
real; also, truthful; faithful. [Archaic] -- Sooth"fast`ness, n.
[Archaic] "In very soothfastness." Chaucer.

    Why do not you . . . bear leal and soothfast evidence in her
    behalf, as ye may with a clear conscience!


Sir W. Scott.

Sooth"fast`, adv. Soothly; really; in fact. [Archaic]

    I care not if the pomps you show Be what they soothfast appear.


Emerson.

Sooth"ing (?), a. & n. from Soothe, v.

Sooth"ing*ly, adv. In a soothing manner.

Sooth"ly (?), adv. In truth; truly; really; verily. [Obs.] "Soothly for
to say." Chaucer.

Sooth"ness, n. Truth; reality. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sooth"say` (?), v. i. [Sooth + say; properly to say truth, tell the
truth.] To foretell; to predict. "You can not soothsay." Shak. "Old
soothsaying Glaucus' spell." Milton.

Sooth"say`, n. 1. A true saying; a proverb; a prophecy. [Obs.] Spenser.

2. Omen; portent. Having

    God turn the same to good soothsay.


Spenser.

Sooth"say`er (?), n. 1. One who foretells events by the art of
soothsaying; a prognosticator.

2. (Zoöl.) A mantis.

Sooth"say`ing, n. 1. A true saying; truth. [Obs.]

2. The act of one who soothsays; the foretelling of events; the art or
practice of making predictions.

    A damsel, possessed with a spirit of divination . . . which brought
    her masters much gain by soothsaying.


Acts xvi. 16.

3. A prediction; a prophecy; a prognostication.

    Divinations and soothsayings and dreams are vain.


Eclus. xxxiv. 5.

Soot"i*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sooty;
fuliginousness. Johnson.

Soot"ish, a. Sooty. Sir T. Browne.

Soot"y (?), a. [Compar Sootier (?); superl. Sootiest.] [AS. s&?;tig.
See Soot.] 1. Of or pertaining to soot; producing soot; soiled by soot.
"Fire of sooty coal." Milton.

2. Having a dark brown or black color like soot; fuliginous; dusky;
dark. "The grisly legions that troop under the sooty flag of Acheron."
Milton.

Sooty albatross (Zoöl.), an albatross (Phœbetria fuliginosa) found
chiefly in the Pacific Ocean; -- called also nellie. -- Sooty tern
(Zoöl.), a tern (Sterna fuliginosa) found chiefly in tropical seas.

Soot"y, v. t. To black or foul with soot. [R.]

    Sootied with noisome smoke.


Chapman.

Sop (?), n. [OE. sop, soppe; akin to AS. s&?;pan to sup, to sip, to
drink, D. sop sop, G. suppe soup, Icel. soppa sop. See Sup, v. t., and
cf. Soup.] 1. Anything steeped, or dipped and softened, in any liquid;
especially, something dipped in broth or liquid food, and intended to
be eaten.

    He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I have dipped it.


John xiii. 26.

    Sops in wine, quantity, inebriate more than wine itself.


Bacon.

    The bounded waters Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
    And make a sop of all this solid globe.


Shak.

2. Anything given to pacify; -- so called from the sop given to
Cerberus, as related in mythology.

    All nature is cured with a sop.


L'Estrange.

3. A thing of little or no value. [Obs.] P. Plowman.

Sops in wine (Bot.), an old name of the clove pink, alluding to its
having been used to flavor wine.

    Garlands of roses and sops in wine.


Spenser.

-- Sops of wine (Bot.), an old European variety of apple, of a yellow
and red color, shading to deep red; -- called also sopsavine, and red
shropsavine.

Sop, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sopped (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sopping.] To steep
or dip in any liquid.

Sope (?), n. See Soap. [Obs.]

Soph (?), n. (Eng. Univ.) A contraction of Soph ister. [Colloq.]

Soph, n. (Amer. Colleges) A contraction of Sophomore. [Colloq.]

So"phi (?), n.; pl. Sophis (&?;). See Sufi.

{ Soph"ic (?), Soph"ic*al (?) }, a. [Gr. &?;, fr. &?; wise, &?;
wisdom.] Teaching wisdom. [Obs.] S. Harris.

So*phime" (? or ?), n. [OF. soffime, sophisme.] Sophism. [Obs.]

    I trow ye study aboute some sophime.


Chaucer.

Soph"ism (?), n. [F. sophisme, L. sophisma, fr. Gr. &?;, fr. &?; to
make wise, &?; to be become wise, to play the sophist, fr. &?; wise.]
The doctrine or mode of reasoning practiced by a sophist; hence, any
fallacy designed to deceive.

    When a false argument puts on the appearance of a true one, then it
    is properly called a sophism, or "fallacy".


I. Watts.

    Let us first rid ourselves of sophisms, those of depraved men, and
    those of heartless philosophers.


I. Taylor.

Soph"ist, n. [F. sophiste, L. sophistes, fr. Gr. &?;. See Sophism.] 1.
One of a class of men who taught eloquence, philosophy, and politics in
ancient Greece; especially, one of those who, by their fallacious but
plausible reasoning, puzzled inquirers after truth, weakened the faith
of the people, and drew upon themselves general hatred and contempt.

    Many of the Sophists doubdtless card not for truth or morality, and
    merely professed to teach how to make the worse appear the better
    reason; but there scems no reason to hold that they were a special
    class, teaching special opinions; even Socrates and Plato were
    sometimes styled Sophists.


Liddell & Scott.

2. Hence, an impostor in argument; a captious or fallacious reasoner.

Soph"ist*er (?), n. 1. A sophist. See Sophist. [Obs.] Hooker.

2. (Eng. Univ.) A student who is advanced beyond the first year of his
residence.

The entire course at the university consists of three years and one
term, during which the students have the titles of first- year men, or
freshmen; second-year men or junior sophs or sophisters; third-year
men, or senior sophs or sophisters; and, in the last term,
questionists, with reference to the approaching examination. In the
older American colleges, the junior and senior classes were originally
called, and in some of them are still called, junior sophisters and
senior sophisters.

Soph"ist*er (?), v. t. To maintain by sophistry, or by a fallacious
argument. [Obs.] obham.

{ So*phis"tic (?), So*phis"tic*al }, a. [L. sophisticus, Gr. &?;: cf.
F. sophistique.] Of or pertaining to a sophist; embodying sophistry;
fallaciously subtile; not sound.

    His argument . . . is altogether sophistical.


Macaulay.

-- So*phis"tic*al*ly, adv. -- So*phis"tic*al*ness, n.

So*phis"ti*cate (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sophisticated (?); p. pr. &
vb. n. Sophisticating.] [LL. sophisticatus, p. p. of sophisticare to
sophisticate.] To render worthless by admixture; to adulterate; to
damage; to pervert; as, to sophisticate wine. Howell.

    To sophisticate the understanding.


Southey.

    Yet Butler professes to stick to plain facts, not to sophisticate,
    not to refine.


M. Arnold.

    They purchase but sophisticated ware.


Dryden.

Syn. -- To adulterate; debase; corrupt; vitiate.

{ So*phis"ti*cate (?), So*phis"ti*ca`ted (?) }, a. Adulterated; not
pure; not genuine.

    So truth, while only one supplied the state, Grew scare and dear,
    and yet sophisticate.


Dryden.

So*phis`ti*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. LL. sophisticatio, F. sophistication.]
The act of sophisticating; adulteration; as, the sophistication of
drugs. Boyle.

So*phis"ti*ca`tor (?), n. One who sophisticates.

Soph"ist*ry (?), n. [OE. sophistrie, OF. sophisterie.] 1. The art or
process of reasoning; logic. [Obs.]

2. The practice of a sophist; fallacious reasoning; reasoning sound in
appearance only.

    The juggle of sophistry consists, for the most part, in usig a word
    in one sense in the premise, and in another sense in the
    conclusion.


Coleridge.

Syn. -- See Fallacy.

Soph"o*more (?), n. [Probably fr. soph or sophister + Gr. &?; foolish.
The word was probably introduced into the United States at an early
date, from the University of Cambridge, England. Among the cant terms
at that university, as given in the Gradus ad Cantabrigiam, we find
Soph- Mor as "the next distinctive appellation to Freshman," but the
term has now almost ceased to be known at the English university from
whence it came.] One belonging to the second of the four classes in an
American college, or one next above a freshman. [Formerly written also
sophimore.]

{ Soph`o*mor"ic (?), Soph`o*mor"ic*al (?) }, a. Of or pertaining to a
sophomore; resembling a sophomore; hence, pretentious; inflated in
style or manner; as, sophomoric affectation. [U. S.]

So*pho"ra (?), n. [Ar. &?;ufair.] (Bot.) (a) A genus of leguminous
plants. (b) A tree (Sophora Japonica) of Eastern Asia, resembling the
common locust; occasionally planted in the United States.

Soph"ta (?), n. See Softa.

So"pite (?), v. t. [L. sopitus, p. p. of sopire to put to sleep; akin
to sopor a sleeping draught, a heavy sleep.] To lay asleep; to put to
sleep; to quiet. [Obs.]

    The king's declaration for the sopiting of all Arminian heresies.


Fuller.

So*pi"tion (?), n. The act of putting to sleep, or the state of being
put to sleep; sleep. [Obs.]

    Dementation and sopition of reason.


Sir T. Browne.

||So"por (?), n. [L.] (Med.) Profound sleep from which a person can be
||roused only with difficulty.

Sop"o*rate (?), v. t. [L. soporatus, p. p. or soporare to put to sleep,
fr. sopor a heavy sleep.] To lay or put to sleep; to stupefy. [Obs.]
Cudworth.

Sop`o*rif"er*ous (?), a. [L. soparifer; sopor a heavy sleep + ferere to
bring.] Causing sleep; somniferous; soporific. "Soporiferous medicine."
Swift.

--- Sop`o*rif"er*ous*ly, adv. -- Sop`o*rif"er*ous*ness, n.

Sop`o*rif"ic (?; 277), a. [L. sopor a heavy sleep (akin to somnus
sleep) + facere to make. See Somnolent, Fact.] Causing sleep; tending
to cause sleep; soporiferous; as, the soporific virtues of opium.

Syn. -- Somniferous; narcotic; opiate; anodyne.

Sop`o*rif"ic, n. A medicine, drug, plant, or other agent that has the
quality of inducing sleep; a narcotic.

{ Sop"o*rose` (?), Sop"o*rous (?) }, a. [From Sopor; cf. L. soporus,
fr. sopor a heavy sleep; F. soporeux.] Causing sleep; sleepy.

Sop"per (?), n. One who sops. Johnson.

Sop"py (?), a. Soaked or saturated with liquid or moisture; very wet or
sloppy.

    It [Yarmouth] looked rather spongy and soppy.


Dickens.

||So"pra (?), adv. [It., from L. supra above.] (Mus.) Above; before;
||over; upon.

So*pra"nist (?), n. (Mus.) A treble singer.

So*pra"no (?), n.; pl. E. Sopranos (#), It. Soprani (#). [It., fr.
soprano superior, highest, fr. sopra above, L. supra. See Sovereign.]
(Mus.) (a) The treble; the highest vocal register; the highest kind of
female or boy's voice; the upper part in harmony for mixed voices. (b)
A singer, commonly a woman, with a treble voice.

Sops"a*vine (?), n. See Sops of wine, under Sop.

<! p. 1373 !>

So"ra (?), n. (Zoöl.) A North American rail (Porzana Carolina) common
in the Eastern United States. Its back is golden brown, varied with
black and white, the front of the head and throat black, the breast and
sides of the head and neck slate-colored. Called also American rail,
Carolina rail, Carolina crake, common rail, sora rail, soree, meadow
chicken, and orto.

King sora, the Florida gallinule.

Sor"ance (? or ?), n. Soreness. [Obs.]

Sorb (?), n.[L. sorbus the tree, sorbum the fruit; cf. F. sorbe. See
Service tree.] (Bot.) (a) The wild service tree (Pyrus torminalis) of
Europe; also, the rowan tree. (b) The fruit of these trees.

Sorb apple, the fruit of the sorb, or wild service tree. -- Sorb tree,
the wild service tree.

Sor"bate (?), n. [Cf. F. sorbate. See Sorbic.] (Chem.) A salt of sorbic
acid.

Sor`be*fa"cient (?), a. [L. sorbere to suck in, absorb + faciens, p.
pr. of facere to make.] (Med.) Producing absorption. -- n. A medicine
or substance which produces absorption.

Sorb"ent (?), n. [L. sorbens, p. pr. of sorbere to suck in, to absorb.]
An absorbent. [R.]

Sor"bet (?), n. [F. sorbet or It. sorbetto or Sp. sorbete, from the
same source as E. sherbet. See Sherbet.] A kind of beverage; sherbet.
Smolett.

Sor"bic (?), a. [Cf. F. sorbique. See Sorb.] (Chem.) Pertaining to, or
obtained from, the rowan tree, or sorb; specifically, designating an
acid, C&?;H&?;CO&?;H, of the acetylene series, found in the unripe
berries of this tree, and extracted as a white crystalline substance.

Sor"bile (?), a. [L. sorbilis, fr. sorbere to suck in, to drink down.]
Fit to be drunk or sipped. [Obs.]

Sor"bin (?), n. (Chem.) An unfermentable sugar, isomeric with glucose,
found in the ripe berries of the rowan tree, or sorb, and extracted as
a sweet white crystalline substance; -- called also mountain-ash sugar.

Sor"bite (?), n. [L. sorbus service tree.] (Chem.) A sugarlike
substance, isomeric with mannite and dulcite, found with sorbin in the
ripe berries of the sorb, and extracted as a sirup or a white
crystalline substance. -- Sor*bit"ic (#), a.

Sor*bi"tion (?), n. [L. sorbitio.] The act of drinking or sipping.
[Obs.]

Sor*bon"ic*al (?), a. Belonging to the Sorbonne or to a Sorbonist.
Bale.

Sor"bon*ist (?), n. [F. sorboniste.] A doctor of the Sorbonne, or
theological college, in the University of Paris, founded by Robert de
Sorbon, a. d. 1252. It was suppressed in the Revolution of 1789.

Sor"cer*er (?), n. [Cf. F. sorcier. See Sorcery.] A conjurer; an
enchanter; a magician. Bacon.

    Pharaoh also called the wise men and the sorcerers.


Ex. vii. 11.

Sor"cer*ess, n. A female sorcerer.

Sor"cer*ing, n. Act or practice of using sorcery.

Sor"cer*ous (?), a. Of or pertaining to sorcery.

Sor"cer*y (?), n.; pl. Sorceries (#). [OE. sorcerie, OF. sorcerie, fr.
OF. & F. sorcier a sorcerer, LL. sortiarius, fr. L. sors, sortis, a
lot, decision by lot, fate, destiny. See Sort, n.] Divination by the
assistance, or supposed assistance, of evil spirits, or the power of
commanding evil spirits; magic; necromancy; witchcraft; enchantment.

    Adder's wisdom I have learned, To fence my ear against thy
    sorceries.


Milton.

Sord (? or ?), n. See Sward. [R.] Milton.

||Sor"des (?), n. [L., fr. sordere to be dirty or foul.] Foul matter;
||excretion; dregs; filthy, useless, or rejected matter of any kind;
||specifically (Med.), the foul matter that collects on the teeth and
||tongue in low fevers and other conditions attended with great vital
||depression.

Sor"det (?), n. [See Sordine.] (Mus.) A sordine.

Sor"did (?), a. [L. sordidus, fr. sordere to be filthy or dirty;
probably akin to E. swart: cf. F. sordide. See Swart, a.] 1. Filthy;
foul; dirty. [Obs.]

    A sordid god; down from his hoary chin A length of beard descends,
    uncombed, unclean.


Dryden.

2. Vile; base; gross; mean; as, vulgar, sordid mortals. "To scorn the
sordid world." Milton.

3. Meanly avaricious; covetous; niggardly.

    He may be old, And yet sordid, who refuses gold.


Sir J. Denham.

Sor*did"ly (?), n. Sordidness. [Obs.]

Sor"did*ly (?), adv. In a sordid manner.

Sor"did*ness, n. The quality or state of being sordid.

Sor"dine (? or ?; 277), n. [It. sordina, sordino, from sordo deaf,
dull-sounding, L. surdus. See Surd.] (Mus.) See Damper, and 5th Mute.

Sore (?), a. [F. saure, sore, sor; faucon sor a sore falcon. See
Sorrel, n.] Reddish brown; sorrel. [R.]

Sore falcon. (Zoöl.) See Sore, n., 1.

Sore, n. (Zoöl.) A young hawk or falcon in the first year.

2. (Zoöl.) A young buck in the fourth year. See the Note under Buck.

Sore, a. [Compar. Sorer (&?;); superl. Sorest.] [OE. sor, sar, AS. sr;
akin to D. zeer, OS. & OHG. s&?;r, G. sehr very, Icel. srr, Sw. sår,
Goth. sair pain. Cf. Sorry.] 1. Tender to the touch; susceptible of
pain from pressure; inflamed; painful; -- said of the body or its
parts; as, a sore hand.

2. Fig.: Sensitive; tender; easily pained, grieved, or vexed; very
susceptible of irritation.

    Malice and hatred are very fretting and vexatious, and apt to make
    our minds sore and uneasy.


Tillotson.

3. Severe; afflictive; distressing; as, a sore disease; sore evil or
calamity. Shak.

4. Criminal; wrong; evil. [Obs.] Shak.

Sore throat (Med.), inflammation of the throat and tonsils;
pharyngitis. See Cynanche. -- Malignant, Ulcerated or Putrid, sore
throat. See Angina, and under Putrid.

Sore (?), n. [OE. sor, sar, AS. sr. See Sore, a.] 1. A place in an
animal body where the skin and flesh are ruptured or bruised, so as to
be tender or painful; a painful or diseased place, such as an ulcer or
a boil.

    The dogs came and licked his sores.


Luke xvi. 21.

2. Fig.: Grief; affliction; trouble; difficulty. Chaucer.

    I see plainly where his sore lies.


Sir W. Scott.

Gold sore. (Med.) See under Gold, n.

Sore, adv. [AS. sre. See Sore, a.] 1. In a sore manner; with pain;
grievously.

    Thy hand presseth me sore.


Ps. xxxviii. 2.

2. Greatly; violently; deeply.

    [Hannah] prayed unto the Lord and wept sore.


1 Sam. i. 10.

    Sore sighed the knight, who this long sermon heard.


Dryden.

||So*re"di*a (?), n., pl. of Soredium.

So*re"di*ate (?), a. (Bot.) Sorediïferous.

{Sor`e*dif"er*ous (?), or So*re`di*if"er*ous (?) }, a. [Soredium +
-ferous.] (Bot.) Bearing soredia; sorediate.

||So*re"di*um (?), n.; pl. Soredia (#). [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a heap.]
||(Bot.) A patch of granular bodies on the surface of the thallus of
||lichens.

So"ree (&?;), n. (Zoöl.) Same as Sora.

Sore"head` (?), n. One who is disgruntled by a failure in politics, or
the like. [Slang, U.S.]

Sore"hon (?), n. [Corrupted from sojourn, Scot. soirne, sorn.]
Formerly, in Ireland, a kind of servile tenure which subjected the
tenant to maintain his chieftain gratuitously whenever he wished to
indulge in a revel. Spenser.

Sor"el (?), n. [A diminutive. See Sore reddish brown.] 1. (Zoöl.) A
young buck in the third year. See the Note under Buck. Shak.

2. A yellowish or reddish brown color; sorrel.

Sore"ly (?), adv. In a sore manner; grievously; painfully; as, to be
sorely afflicted.

||So*re"ma (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a heap.] (Bot.) A heap of carpels
||belonging to one flower.

Sore"ness (?), n. The quality or state of being sore; tenderness;
painfull; as, the soreness of a wound; the soreness of an affliction.

||So"rex (?), n. [L., a shrew.] (Zoöl.) A genus of small Insectivora,
||including the common shrews.

Sor"ghe (sôr"g), n. (Zoöl.) The three-bearded rockling, or whistlefish.
[Prov. Eng.]

Sor"ghum (?), n. [NL., probably of Chinese origin.] (Bot.) (a) A genus
of grasses, properly limited to two species, Sorghum Halepense, the
Arabian millet, or Johnson grass (see Johnson grass), and S. vulgare,
the Indian millet (see Indian millet, under Indian). (b) A variety of
Sorghum vulgare, grown for its saccharine juice; the Chinese sugar
cane.

Sor"go (?), n. [Cf. It. sorgo. See Sorghum.] (Bot.) Indian millet and
its varieties. See Sorghum.

||So"ri (?), n., pl. of Sorus.

So"ri*cine (?), a. [L. sorricinus, fr. sorex a shrew.] (Zoöl.) Of or
pertaining to the Shrew family (Soricidæ); like a shrew in form or
habits; as, the soricine bat (Glossophaga soricina).

So*ri"tes (?), n. [L., from Gr. swrei`ths (sc. syllogismo`s), properly,
heaped up (hence, a heap of syllogisms), fr. swro`s a heap.] (Logic) An
abridged form of stating of syllogisms in a series of propositions so
arranged that the predicate of each one that precedes forms the subject
of each one that follows, and the conclusion unites the subject of the
first proposition with the predicate of the last proposition, as in
following example; --

    The soul is a thinking agent; A thinking agent can not be severed
    into parts; That which can not be severed can not be destroyed;
    Therefore the soul can not be destroyed.


When the series is arranged in the reverse order, it is called the
Goclenian sorites, from Goclenius, a philosopher of the sixteenth
century.

Destructive sorities. See under Destructive.

So"rit"ic*al, a. Of or pertaining to a sorites; resembling a sorites.

Sorn (?), v. i. [See Sorehon.] To obtrude one's self on another for bed
and board. [Scot.] Sir W. Scott.

Sorn"er (?), n. One who obtrudes himself on another for bed and board.
[Scot.] De Quncey.

So*ro"ral (?), a. [L. soror sister: cf. F. sororal.] Relating to a
sister; sisterly. [R.]

So*ror"i*cide (?; 277), n. [L. sororocida, and sororicidium; soror a
sister + caedere to kill.] The murder of one's sister; also, one who
murders or kills one's own sister. Johnson.

So*ro"rize (? or ?), v. i. [L. soror, sororis, a sister.] To associate,
or hold fellowship, as sisters; to have sisterly feelings; -- analogous
to fraternize. [Recent & R.]

So*ro"sis (?), n. [NL. See Sororize.] A woman's club; an association of
women. [U. S.]

||So*ro"sis, n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a heap.] (Bot.) A fleshy fruit formed
||by the consolidation of many flowers with their receptacles, ovaries,
||etc., as the breadfruit, mulberry, and pineapple.

Sor"rage (?; 48), n. [Cf. Sorrel, n.] The blades of green or barley.
[Obs.] Bailey.

Sor"rance (?), n. Same as Sorance. [Obs.]

Sor"rel (?), a. [F. saur, saure, OF. sor, sore, probably of Teutonic
origin; cf. D. zoor dry, LG. soor; the meaning probably coming from the
color of dry leaves. See Sear, a., and cf. Sorel.] Of a yellowish or
redish brown color; as, a sorrel horse.

Sor"rel (?), n. A yellowish or redish brown color.

Sor"rel, n. [F. surelle, fr. sur sour, fr. OHG. s&?;r sour. See Sour.]
(Bot.) One of various plants having a sour juice; especially, a plant
of the genus Rumex, as Rumex Acetosa, Rumex Acetosella, etc.

Mountain sorrel. (Bot.) See under Mountain. -- Red sorrel. (Bot.) (a) A
malvaceous plant (Hibiscus Sabdariffa) whose acid calyxes and capsules
are used in the West Indies for making tarts and acid drinks. (b) A
troublesome weed (Rumex Acetosella), also called sheep sorrel. -- Salt
of sorrel (Chem.), binoxalate of potassa; -- so called because obtained
from the juice of Rumex Acetosella, or Rumex Axetosa. -- Sorrel tree
(Bot.), a small ericaceous tree (Oxydendrum arboreum) whose leaves
resemble those of the peach and have a sour taste. It is common along
the Alleghanies. Called also sourwood. -- Wood sorrel (Bot.), any plant
of the genus Oxalis.

Sor"ren"to work` (?). Ornamental work, mostly carved in olivewood,
decorated with inlay, made at or near Sorrento, Italy. Hence, more
rarely, jig-saw work and the like done anywhere.

Sor"ri*ly (?), adv. In a sorry manner; poorly.

    Thy pipe, O Pan, shall help, though I sing sorrily.


Sir P. Sidney.

Sor"ri*ness, n. The quality or state of being sorry.

Sor"row (?), n. [OE. sorwe, sorewe, sor&?;e, AS. sorg, sorh; akin to D.
zorg care, anxiety, OS. sorga, OHG. sorga, soraga, suorga, G. sorge,
Icel., Sw., & Dan. sorg, Goth. saúrga; of unknown origin.] The
uneasiness or pain of mind which is produced by the loss of any good,
real or supposed, or by diseappointment in the expectation of good;
grief at having suffered or occasioned evil; regret; unhappiness;
sadness. Milton.

    How great a sorrow suffereth now Arcite!


Chaucer.

    The safe and general antidote against sorrow is employment.


Rambler.

Syn. -- Grief; unhappiness; regret; sadness; heaviness; mourning;
affliction. See Affliction, and Grief.

Sor"row, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sorrowed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sorrowing.]
[OE. sorowen, sorwen, sorhen, AS. sorgian; akin to Goth. saúrgan. See
Sorrow, n.] To feel pain of mind in consequence of evil experienced,
feared, or done; to grieve; to be sad; to be sorry.

    Sorrowing most of all . . . that they should see his face no more.


Acts xx. 38.

    I desire no man to sorrow for me.


Sir J. Hayward.

Sor"rowed (?) (&?;), a. Accompanied with sorrow; sorrowful. [Obs.]
Shak.

Sor"row*ful (?), a. [OE. sorweful, AS. sorgful.] 1. Full of sorrow;
exhibiting sorrow; sad; dejected; distressed. "This sorrowful
prisoner." Chaucer.

    My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.


Matt. xxvi. 38.

2. Producing sorrow; exciting grief; mournful; lamentable; grievous;
as, a sorrowful accident.

Syn. -- Sad; mournful; dismal; disconsolate; drear; dreary; grievous;
lamentable; doleful; distressing.

-- Sor"row*ful*ly, adv. -- Sor"row*ful*ness, n.

Sor"row*less, a. Free from sorrow.

Sor"ry (?), a. [Compar. Sorrier (?); superl. Sorriest.] [OE. sory,
sary, AS. srig, fr. sr, n., sore. See Sore, n. & a. The original sense
was, painful; hence, miserable, sad.] 1. Grieved for the loss of some
good; pained for some evil; feeling regret; -- now generally used to
express light grief or affliction, but formerly often used to express
deeper feeling. "I am sorry for my sins." Piers Plowman.

    Ye were made sorry after a godly manner.


2 Cor. vii. 9.

    I am sorry for thee, friend; 't is the duke's pleasure.


Shak.

    She entered, were he lief or sorry.


Spenser.

2. Melancholy; dismal; gloomy; mournful. Spenser.

    All full of chirking was this sorry place.


Chaucer.

3. Poor; mean; worthless; as, a sorry excuse. "With sorry grace."
Chaucer.

    Cheeks of sorry grain will serve.


Milton.

    Good fruit will sometimes grow on a sorry tree.


Sir W. Scott.

Syn. -- Hurt; afflicted; mortified; vexed; chagrined; melancholy;
dismal; poor; mean; pitiful.

||Sors (?), n.; pl. Sortes (#). [L.] A lot; also, a kind of divination
||by means of lots.

Sortes Homericæ or Virgilianæ [L., Homeric or Virgilian lots], a form
of divination anciently practiced, which consisted in taking the first
passage on which the eye fell, upon opening a volume of Homer or
Virgil, or a passage drawn from an urn which several were deposited, as
indicating future events, or the proper course to be pursued. In later
times the Bible was used for the same purpose by Christians.

Sort (?), n. [F. sorl, L. sors, sortis. See Sort kind.] Chance; lot;
destiny. [Obs.]

    By aventure, or sort, or cas [chance].


Chaucer.

    Let blockish Ajax draw The sort to fight with Hector.


Shak.

<! p. 1374 !>

Sort, n. [F. sorie (cf. It. sorta, sorte), from L. sors, sorti, a lot,
part, probably akin to serere to connect. See Series, and cf. Assort,
Consort, Resort, Sorcery, Sort lot.] 1. A kind or species; any number
or collection of individual persons or things characterized by the same
or like qualities; a class or order; as, a sort of men; a sort of
horses; a sort of trees; a sort of poems.

2. Manner; form of being or acting.

    Which for my part I covet to perform, In sort as through the world
    I did proclaim.


Spenser.

    Flowers, in such sort worn, can neither be smelt nor seen well by
    those that wear them.


Hooker.

    I'll deceive you in another sort.


Shak.

    To Adam in what sort Shall I appear?


Milton.

    I shall not be wholly without praise, if in some sort I have copied
    his style.


Dryden.

3. Condition above the vulgar; rank. [Obs.] Shak.

4. A chance group; a company of persons who happen to be together; a
troop; also, an assemblage of animals. [Obs.] "A sort of shepherds."
Spenser. "A sort of steers." Spenser. "A sort of doves." Dryden. "A
sort of rogues." Massinger.

    A boy, a child, and we a sort of us, Vowed against his voyage.


Chapman.

5. A pair; a set; a suit. Johnson.

6. pl. (Print.) Letters, figures, points, marks, spaces, or quadrats,
belonging to a case, separately considered.

Out of sorts (Print.), with some letters or sorts of type deficient or
exhausted in the case or font; hence, colloquially, out of order; ill;
vexed; disturbed. -- To run upon sorts (Print.), to use or require a
greater number of some particular letters, figures, or marks than the
regular proportion, as, for example, in making an index.

Syn. -- Kind; species; rank; condition. -- Sort, Kind. Kind originally
denoted things of the same family, or bound together by some natural
affinity; and hence, a class. Sort signifies that which constitutes a
particular lot of parcel, not implying necessarily the idea of
affinity, but of mere assemblage. the two words are now used to a great
extent interchangeably, though sort (perhaps from its original meaning
of lot) sometimes carries with it a slight tone of disparagement or
contempt, as when we say, that sort of people, that sort of language.

    As when the total kind Of birds, in orderly array on wing, Came
    summoned over Eden to receive Their names of there.


Milton.

    None of noble sort Would so offend a virgin.


Shak.

Sort (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sorted; p. pr. & vb. n. Sorting.] 1. To
separate, and place in distinct classes or divisions, as things having
different qualities; as, to sort cloths according to their colors; to
sort wool or thread according to its fineness.

    Rays which differ in refrangibility may be parted and sorted from
    one another.


Sir I. Newton.

2. To reduce to order from a confused state. Hooker.

3. To conjoin; to put together in distribution; to class.

    Shellfish have been, by some of the ancients, compared and sorted
    with insects.


Bacon.

    She sorts things present with things past.


Sir J. Davies.

4. To choose from a number; to select; to cull.

    That he may sort out a worthy spouse.


Chapman.

    I'll sort some other time to visit you.


Shak.

5. To conform; to adapt; to accommodate. [R.]

    I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience.


Shak.

Sort, v. i. 1. To join or associate with others, esp. with others of
the same kind or species; to agree.

    Nor do metals only sort and herd with metals in the earth, and
    minerals with minerals.


Woodward.

    The illiberality of parents towards children makes them base, and
    sort with any company.


Bacon.

2. To suit; to fit; to be in accord; to harmonize.

    They are happy whose natures sort with their vocations.


Bacon.

    Things sort not to my will.


herbert.

    I can not tell you precisely how they sorted.


Sir W. Scott.

Sort"a*ble (?), a. [Cf. F. sortable suitable.] 1. Capable of being
sorted.

2. Suitable; befitting; proper. [Obs.] con.

Sort"a*bly, adv. Suitable. [Obs.] otgrave.

Sort"al (?), a. Pertaining to a sort. [Obs.] Locke.

Sort"ance (?), n. [From Sort, v. i.] Suitableness; agreement. [Obs.]
hak.

Sort"er (?), n. One who, or that which, sorts.

||Sor"tes (?), n., pl. of Sors.

Sor"tie (?; 277), n. [F., fr. sortir to go out, to issue, probably fr.
L. sortus, for surrectus, p. p. of surgere to raise up, to rise up. See
Source.] (Mil.) The sudden issuing of a body of troops, usually small,
from a besieged place to attack or harass the besiegers; a sally.

Sor"ti*lege (?), n. [F. sortilège, fr. L. sors, sortis, a lot + legere
to gather, to select.] The act or practice of drawing lots; divination
by drawing lots.

    A woman infamous for sortileges and witcheries.


Sir W. Scott.

Sor`ti*le"gious (?), a. Pertaining to sortilege.

Sor"til"e*gy (?), n. Sortilege. [R.] De Quincey.

Sor*ti"tion (?), n. [L. sortitio, from sortiri to draw or cast lots,
fr. sors, sortis, a lot.] Selection or appointment by lot. [Obs.] Bp.
Hall.

Sort"ment (?), n. Assortiment. [Obs.]

||So"rus (?), n.; pl. Sori (#). [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a heap.] (Bot.) One
||of the fruit dots, or small clusters of sporangia, on the back of the
||fronds of ferns.

Sor"we (?), n. & v. Sorrow. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sor"we*ful (?), a. Sorrowful. [Obs.] Chaucer.

So"ry (?), n. [L. sory, Gr. &?;.] (Old Min. Chem.) Green vitriol, or
some earth imregnated with it.

So"-so` (?), a. [So + so.] Neither very good nor very bad; middling;
passable; tolerable; indifferent.

    In some Irish houses, where things are so- so, One gammon of bacon
    hangs up for a show.


Goldsmith.

    He [Burns] certainly wrote some so-so verses to the Tree of
    Liberty.


Prof. Wilson.

So"-so`, adv. Tolerably; passably. H. James.

Soss (?; 115), v. i. [Cf. Souse.] To fall at once into a chair or seat;
to sit lazily. [Obs.] Swift.

Soss, v. t. To throw in a negligent or careless manner; to toss. [Obs.]
Swift.

Soss, n. 1. A lazy fellow. [Obs.] Cotgrave.

2. A heavy fall. [Prov. Eng.] Hallowell.

Soss, n. [See Sesspol.] Anything dirty or muddy; a dirty puddle. [Prov.
Eng.]

||Sos`te*nu"to (?), a. [It.] (Mus.) Sustained; -- applied to a movement
||or passage the sounds of which are to sustained to the utmost of the
||nominal value of the time; also, to a passage the tones of which are
||to be somewhat prolonged or protacted.

Sot (?), n. [F., fr. LL. sottus; of unknown origin, cf. Ir. sotal
pride, soithir proud, or Chald. & NHeb. shoten foolish.] 1. A stupid
person; a blockhead; a dull fellow; a dolt. [Obs.] outh.

    In Egypt oft has seen the sot bow down, And reverence some
    d&?;ified baboon.


Oldham.

2. A person stupefied by excessive drinking; an habitual drunkard. "A
brutal sot." Granville.

    Every sign That calls the staring sots to nasty wine.


Roscommon.

Sot (?), a. Sottish; foolish; stupid; dull. [Obs.] "Rich, but sot."
Marston.

Sot, v. t. To stupefy; to infatuate; to besot. [R.]

    I hate to see a brave, bold fellow sotted.


Dryden.

Sot, v. i. To tipple to stupidity. [R.] Goldsmith.

So`ta*de"an (?), a. Sotadic.

So*tad"ic (?), a. Pertaining to, or resembling, the lascivious
compositions of the Greek poet Sotades. -- n. A Sotadic verse or poem.

Sote (?), a. Sweet. [Obs.] Chaucer. Fairfax.

{ So"tel (?), So"til (?) }, a. Subtile. [Obs.]

So*te`ri*ol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. &?; safety (from &?; saving, &?; a
savoir, &?; to save) + -logy.] 1. A discourse on health, or the science
of promoting and preserving health.

2. (Theol.) The doctrine of salvation by Jesus Christ.

Sothe (? or ?), a. Sooth. [Obs.] Chaucer.

{ So"thi*ac (?), Soth"ic (?) }, a. Of or pertaining to Sothis, the
Egyptian name for the Dog Star; taking its name from the Dog Star;
canicular.

Sothiac, or Sothic, year (Chronol.), the Egyptian year of 365 days and
6 hours, as distinguished from the Egyptian vague year, which contained
365 days. The Sothic period consists of 1,460 Sothic years, being equal
to 1,461 vague years. One of these periods ended in July, a. d. 139.

So"til*te (?), n. Subtlety. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sot"ted (?), a. & p. p. of Sot. Befooled; deluded; besotted. [Obs.]
"This sotted priest." Chaucer.

Sot"ter*y (?), n. Folly. [Obs.] Gauden.

Sot"tish (?), a. [From Sot.] Like a sot; doltish; very foolish;
drunken.

    How ignorant are sottish pretenders to astrology!


Swift.

Syn. -- Dull; stupid; senseless; doltish; infatuate.

-- Sot"tish*ly, adv. -- Sot"tish*ness, n.

||Sot`to vo"ce (?). [It.] 1. (Mus.) With a restrained voice or moderate
||force; in an undertone.

2. Spoken low or in an undertone.

Sou (?), n.; pl. Sous (#) or (#). [F. sou, OF. sol, from L. solidus a
gold coin, in LL., a coin of less value. See Sold, n., Solid, and and
cf. Sol, Soldo.] An old French copper coin, equivalent in value to, and
now displaced by, the five-centime piece ( of a franc), which is
popularly called a sou.

Sou*a"ri nut` (?). (Bot.) The large edible nutlike seed of a tall
tropical American tree (Caryocar nuciferum) of the same natural order
with the tea plant; -- also called butternut. [Written also sawarra
nut.]

||Sou"bah (?), n. See Subah.

||Sou"bah*dar (?), n. See Subahdar.

Sou`brette", n. [F.] A female servant or attendant; specifically, as a
term of the theater, a lady's maid, in comedies, who acts the part of
an intrigante; a meddlesome, mischievous female servant or young woman.

Sou`bri`quet" (?), n. See Sobriquet.

Souce (?), n. See 1st Souse.

Souce, v. t. & i. See Souse. [Obs.] penser.

Sou*chong" (?), n. [Chin. seou chong little plant or sort.] A kind of
black tea of a fine quality.

Sou*dan" (?), n.[F.] A sultan. [Obs.]

Soud"ed (&?;), Soud"et (&?;), a. [See Solder.] United; consolidated;
made firm; strengthened. [Obs.]

    O martyr souded for virginity!


Chaucer.

Souf"fle (?), n. [F.] (Med.) A murmuring or blowing sound; as, the
uterine souffle heard over the pregnant uterus.

Souf"flé (?), n. [F., fr. soufflé, p. p. of souffler to puff.]
(Cookery) A side dish served hot from the oven at dinner, made of eggs,
milk, and flour or other farinaceous substance, beaten till very light,
and flavored with fruits, liquors, or essence.

Sough (?), n. A sow. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sough (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] A small drain; an adit. [Prov. Eng.]
W. M. Buchanan.

Sough (?; 277), n. [Cf. Icel. s&?;gr (in comp.) a rushing sound, or OE.
swough, swogh, a sound, AS. sw&?;gan to rustle. Cf. Surf, Swoon, v. i.]
1. The sound produced by soughing; a hollow murmur or roaring.

    The whispering leaves or solemn sough of the forest.


W. Howitt.

2. Hence, a vague rumor or flying report. [Scot.]

3. A cant or whining mode of speaking, especially in preaching or
praying. [Scot.] Jamieson.

Sough, v. i. To whistle or sigh, as the wind.

Sought (?), imp. & p. p. of Seek.

Souke (?), v. t. & i. To suck. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Soul (?), a. Sole. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Soul (?), a. Sole. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Soul, v. i. [F. soûler to satiate. See Soil to feed.] To afford
suitable sustenance. [Obs.] Warner.

Soul, n. [OE. soule, saule, AS. swel, swl; akin to OFries. s&?;le, OS.
s&?;ola, D. ziel, G. seele, OHG. s&?;la, s&?;ula, Icel. sla, Sw. själ,
Dan. siæl, Goth. saiwala; of uncertain origin, perhaps akin to L.
saeculum a lifetime, age (cf. Secular.)] 1. The spiritual, rational,
and immortal part in man; that part of man which enables him to think,
and which renders him a subject of moral government; -- sometimes, in
distinction from the higher nature, or spirit, of man, the so-called
animal soul, that is, the seat of life, the sensitive affections and
phantasy, exclusive of the voluntary and rational powers; -- sometimes,
in distinction from the mind, the moral and emotional part of man's
nature, the seat of feeling, in distinction from intellect; --
sometimes, the intellect only; the understanding; the seat of
knowledge, as distinguished from feeling. In a more general sense, "an
animating, separable, surviving entity, the vehicle of individual
personal existence." Tylor.

    The eyes of our souls only then begin to see, when our bodily eyes
    are closing.


Law.

2. The seat of real life or vitality; the source of action; the
animating or essential part. "The hidden soul of harmony." Milton.

    Thou sun, of this great world both eye and soul.


Milton.

3. The leader; the inspirer; the moving spirit; the heart; as, the soul
of an enterprise; an able general is the soul of his army.

    He is the very soul of bounty!


Shak.

4. Energy; courage; spirit; fervor; affection, or any other noble
manifestation of the heart or moral nature; inherent power or goodness.

    That he wants algebra he must confess; But not a soul to give our
    arms success.


Young.

5. A human being; a person; -- a familiar appellation, usually with a
qualifying epithet; as, poor soul.

    As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
    country.


Prov. xxv. 25.

    God forbid so many simple souls Should perish by the aword!


Shak.

    Now mistress Gilpin (careful soul).


Cowper.

6. A pure or disembodied spirit.

    That to his only Son . . . every soul in heaven Shall bend the
    knee.


Milton.

Soul is used in the formation of numerous compounds, most of which are
of obvious signification; as, soul-betraying, soul-consuming,
soul-destroying, soul- distracting, soul-enfeebling, soul-exalting,
soul-felt, soul-harrowing, soul-piercing, soul-quickening,
soul-reviving, soul-stirring, soul-subduing, soul-withering, etc.

Syn. -- Spirit; life; courage; fire; ardor.

Cure of souls. See Cure, n., 2. -- Soul bell, the passing bell. Bp.
Hall. -- Soul foot. See Soul scot, below. [Obs.] -- Soul scot or Soul
shot. [Soul + scot, or shot; cf. AS. swelsceat.] (O. Eccl. Law) A
funeral duty paid in former times for a requiem for the soul. Ayliffe.

Soul (?), v. t. To indue with a soul; to furnish with a soul or mind.
[Obs.] Chaucer.

Souled (?), a. Furnished with a soul; possessing soul and feeling; --
used chiefly in composition; as, great-souled Hector. "Grecian chiefs .
. . largely souled." Dryden.

||Sou"li*li` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A long-tailed, crested Javan monkey
||(Semnopithecus mitratus). The head, the crest, and the upper surface
||of the tail, are black.

Soul"less (?), a. Being without a soul, or without greatness or
nobleness of mind; mean; spiritless.

    Slave, souless villain, dog!


Shak.

Soul"less*ly, adv. In a soulless manner. Tylor.

Soun (?), n. & v. Sound. [Obs.] aucer.

Sound (?), n. [AS. sund a swimming, akin to E. swim. See Swim.] The air
bladder of a fish; as, cod sounds are an esteemed article of food.

Sound, n. (Zoöl.) A cuttlefish. [Obs.] Ainsworth.

Sound, a. [Compar. Sounder (?); superl. Soundest.] [OE. sound, AS.
sund; akin to D. gezond, G. gesund, OHG. gisunt, Dan. & Sw. sund, and
perhaps to L. sanus. Cf. Sane.] 1. Whole; unbroken; unharmed; free from
flaw, defect, or decay; perfect of the kind; as, sound timber; sound
fruit; a sound tooth; a sound ship.

2. Healthy; not diseased; not being in a morbid state; -- said of body
or mind; as, a sound body; a sound constitution; a sound understanding.

3. Firm; strong; safe.

    The brasswork here, how rich it is in beams, And how, besides, it
    makes the whole house sound.


Chapman.

4. Free from error; correct; right; honest; true; faithful; orthodox;
-- said of persons; as, a sound lawyer; a sound thinker.

    Do not I know you a favorer Of this new seat? Ye are nor sound.


Shak.

5. Founded in truth or right; supported by justice; not to be
overthrown on refuted; not fallacious; as, sound argument or reasoning;
a sound objection; sound doctrine; sound principles.

    Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me.


2 Tim. i. 13.

6. heavy; laid on with force; as, a sound beating.

7. Undisturbed; deep; profound; as, sound sleep.

8. Founded in law; legal; valid; not defective; as, a sound title to
land.

Sound is sometimes used in the formation of self- explaining compounds;
as, sound-headed, sound-hearted, sound-timbered, etc.

Sound currency (Com.), a currency whose actual value is the same as its
nominal value; a currency which does not deteriorate or depreciate or
fluctuate in comparision with the standard of values.

Sound, adv. Soundly.

    So sound he slept that naught might him awake.


Spenser.

Sound, n. [AS. sund a narrow sea or strait; akin to Icel., Sw., Dan. &
G. sund, probably so named because it could be swum across. See Swim.]
(Geog.) A narrow passage of water, or a strait between the mainland and
an island; also, a strait connecting two seas, or connecting a sea or
lake with the ocean; as, the Sound between the Baltic and the german
Ocean; Long Island Sound.

    The Sound of Denmark, where ships pay toll.


Camden.

Sound dues, tolls formerly imposed by Denmark on vessels passing
through the Baltic Sound.

Sound, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sounded; p. pr. & vb. n. Sounding.] [F.
sonder; cf. AS. sundgyrd a sounding rod, sundline a sounding line (see
Sound a narrow passage of water).] 1. To measure the depth of; to
fathom; especially, to ascertain the depth of by means of a line and
plummet.

2. Fig.: To ascertain, or try to ascertain, the thoughts, motives, and
purposes of (a person); to examine; to try; to test; to probe.

    I was in jest, And by that offer meant to sound your breast.


Dryden.

    I've sounded my Numidians man by man.


Addison.

3. (Med.) To explore, as the bladder or urethra, with a sound; to
examine with a sound; also, to examine by auscultation or percussion;
as, to sound a patient.

<! p. 1375 !>

Sound (?), v. i. To ascertain the depth of water with a sounding line
or other device.

    I sound as a shipman soundeth in the sea with his plummet to know
    the depth of sea.


Palsgrave.

Sound, n. [F. sonde. See Sound to fathom.] (Med.) Any elongated
instrument or probe, usually metallic, by which cavities of the body
are sounded or explored, especially the bladder for stone, or the
urethra for a stricture.

Sound, n. [OE. soun, OF. son, sun, F. son, fr. L. sonus akin to Skr.
svana sound, svan to sound, and perh. to E. swan. Cf. Assonant,
Consonant, Person, Sonata, Sonnet, Sonorous, Swan.] 1. The peceived
object occasioned by the impulse or vibration of a material substance
affecting the ear; a sensation or perception of the mind received
through the ear, and produced by the impulse or vibration of the air or
other medium with which the ear is in contact; the effect of an
impression made on the organs of hearing by an impulse or vibration of
the air caused by a collision of bodies, or by other means; noise;
report; as, the sound of a drum; the sound of the human voice; a horrid
sound; a charming sound; a sharp, high, or shrill sound.

    The warlike sound Of trumpets loud and clarions.


Milton.

2. The occasion of sound; the impulse or vibration which would occasion
sound to a percipient if present with unimpaired; hence, the theory of
vibrations in elastic media such cause sound; as, a treatise on sound.

In this sense, sounds are spoken of as audible and inaudible.

3. Noise without signification; empty noise; noise and nothing else.

    Sense and not sound . . . must be the principle.


Locke.

Sound boarding, boards for holding pugging, placed in partitions of
under floors in order to deaden sounds. - - Sound bow, in a series of
transverse sections of a bell, that segment against which the clapper
strikes, being the part which is most efficacious in producing the
sound. See Illust. of Bell. -- Sound post. (Mus.) See Sounding post,
under Sounding.

Sound, v. i. [OE. sounen, sownen, OF. soner, suner, F. sonner, from L.
sonare. See Sound a noise.] 1. To make a noise; to utter a voice; to
make an impulse of the air that shall strike the organs of hearing with
a perceptible effect. "And first taught speaking trumpets how to
sound." Dryden.

    How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues!


Shak.

2. To be conveyed in sound; to be spread or published; to convey
intelligence by sound.

    From you sounded out the word of the Lord.


1 Thess. i. 8.

3. To make or convey a certain impression, or to have a certain import,
when heard; hence, to seem; to appear; as, this reproof sounds harsh;
the story sounds like an invention.

    Good sir, why do you start, and seem to fear Things that do sound
    so fair?


Shak.

To sound in or into, to tend to; to partake of the nature of; to be
consonant with. [Obs., except in the phrase To sound in damages,
below.]

    Soun[d]ing in moral virtue was his speech.


Chaucer.

-- To sound in damages (Law), to have the essential quality of damages.
This is said of an action brought, not for the recovery of a specific
thing, as replevin, etc., but for damages only, as trespass, and the
like.

Sound, v. t. 1. To causse to make a noise; to play on; as, to sound a
trumpet or a horn.

    A bagpipe well could he play and soun[d].


Chaucer.

2. To cause to exit as a sound; as, to sound a note with the voice, or
on an instrument.

3. To order, direct, indicate, or proclain by a sound, or sounds; to
give a signal for by a certain sound; as, to sound a retreat; to sound
a parley.

    The clock sounded the hour of noon.


G. H. Lewes.

4. To celebrate or honor by sounds; to cause to be reported; to publish
or proclaim; as, to sound the praises of fame of a great man or a great
exploit.

5. To examine the condition of (anything) by causing the same to emit
sounds and noting their character; as, to sound a piece of timber; to
sound a vase; to sound the lungs of a patient.

6. To signify; to import; to denote. [Obs.] Milton.

    Soun[d]ing alway the increase of his winning.


Chaucer.

Sound"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being sounded.

Sound"age (?; 48), n. Dues for soundings.

Sound"-board` (?), n. A sounding- board.

    To many a row of pipes the sound-board breathes.


Milton.

Sound"er (?), n. One who, or that which; sounds; specifically, an
instrument used in telegraphy in place of a register, the
communications being read by sound.

Sound"er, n. (Zoöl.) A herd of wild hogs.

Sound"ing, a. Making or emitting sound; hence, sonorous; as, sounding
words. Dryden.

Sound"ing, n. 1. The act of one who, or that which, sounds (in any of
the senses of the several verbs).

2. (Naut.) [From Sound to fathom.] (a) measurement by sounding; also,
the depth so ascertained. (b) Any place or part of the ocean, or other
water, where a sounding line will reach the bottom; -- usually in the
plural. (c) The sand, shells, or the like, that are brought up by the
sounding lead when it has touched bottom.

Sounding lead, the plummet at the end of a sounding line. -- Sounding
line, a line having a plummet at the end, used in making soundings. --
Sounding post (Mus.), a small post in a violin, violoncello, or similar
instrument, set under the bridge as a support, for propagating the
sounds to the body of the instrument; -- called also sound post. --
Sounding rod (Naut.), a rod used to ascertain the depth of water in a
ship's hold. -- In soundings, within the eighty-fathom line. Ham. Nav.
Encyc.

Sound"ing-board` (?), n. 1. (Mus.) A thin board which propagates the
sound in a piano, in a violin, and in some other musical instruments.

2. A board or structure placed behind or over a pulpit or rostrum to
give distinctness to a speaker's voice.

3. pl. See Sound boarding, under Sound, a noise.

Sound"less (?), a. Not capable of being sounded or fathomed;
unfathomable. Shak.

Sound"less, a. Having no sound; noiseless; silent. -- Sound"less*ly,
adv. -- Sound"less*ness, n.

Sound"ly, adv. In a sound manner.

Sound"ness, n. The quality or state of being sound; as, the soundness
of timber, of fruit, of the teeth, etc.; the soundness of reasoning or
argument; soundness of faith.

Syn. -- Firmness; strength; solidity; healthiness; truth; rectitude.

Soune (?), v. t. & i. To sound. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sounst (?), a. Soused. See Souse. [Obs.]

Soup (?), n. [F. soupe, OF. sope, supe, soupe, perhaps originally, a
piece of bread; probably of Teutonic origin; cf. D. sop sop, G. suppe
soup. See Sop something dipped in a liquid, and cf. Supper.] A liquid
food of many kinds, usually made by boiling meat and vegetables, or
either of them, in water, -- commonly seasoned or flavored; strong
broth.

Soup kitchen, an establishment for preparing and supplying soup to the
poor. -- Soup ticket, a ticket conferring the privilege of receiving
soup at a soup kitchen.

Soup, v. t. To sup or swallow. [Obs.] Wyclif.

Soup, v. t. To breathe out. [Obs.] amden.

Soup, v. t. To sweep. See Sweep, and Swoop. [Obs.]

||Soupe`-mai"gre (?), n. [F.] (Cookery) Soup made chiefly from
||vegetables or fish with a little butter and a few condiments.

Sou"ple (?), n. That part of a flail which strikes the grain. Knight.

Soup"y (?), a. Resembling soup; souplike.

Sour (?), a. [Compar. Sourer (?); superl. Sourest.] [OE. sour, sur, AS.
s&?;r; akin to D. zuur, G. sauer, OHG. s&?;r, Icel. s&?;rr, Sw. sur,
Dan. suur, Lith. suras salt, Russ. surovui harsh, rough. Cf. Sorrel,
the plant.] 1. Having an acid or sharp, biting taste, like vinegar, and
the juices of most unripe fruits; acid; tart.

    All sour things, as vinegar, provoke appetite.


Bacon.

2. Changed, as by keeping, so as to be acid, rancid, or musty, turned.

3. Disagreeable; unpleasant; hence; cross; crabbed; peevish; morose;
as, a man of a sour temper; a sour reply. "A sour countenance." Swift.

    He was a scholar . . . Lofty and sour to them that loved him not,
    But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.


Shak.

4. Afflictive; painful. "Sour adversity." Shak.

5. Cold and unproductive; as, sour land; a sour marsh.

Sour dock (Bot.), sorrel. -- Sour gourd (Bot.), the gourdlike fruit
Adansonia Gregorii, and A. digitata; also, either of the trees bearing
this fruit. See Adansonia. -- Sour grapes. See under Grape. -- Sour gum
(Bot.) See Turelo. -- Sour plum (Bot.), the edible acid fruit of an
Australian tree (Owenia venosa); also, the tree itself, which furnished
a hard reddish wood used by wheelwrights.

Syn. -- Acid; sharp; tart; acetous; acetose; harsh; acrimonious;
crabbed; currish; peevish.

Sour, n. A sour or acid substance; whatever produces a painful effect.
Spenser.

Sour, v. t. [AS. s&?;rian to sour, to become sour.] 1. To cause to
become sour; to cause to turn from sweet to sour; as, exposure to the
air sours many substances.

    So the sun's heat, with different powers, Ripens the grape, the
    liquor sours.


Swift.

2. To make cold and unproductive, as soil. Mortimer.

3. To make unhappy, uneasy, or less agreeable.

    To sour your happiness I must report, The queen is dead.


Shak.

4. To cause or permit to become harsh or unkindly. "Souring his
cheeks." Shak.

    Pride had not sour'd nor wrath debased my heart.


Harte.

5. To macerate, and render fit for plaster or mortar; as, to sour lime
for business purposes.

Sour, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Soured (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Souring.] To
become sour; to turn from sweet to sour; as, milk soon sours in hot
weather; a kind temper sometimes sours in adversity.

    They keep out melancholy from the virtuous, and hinder the hatred
    of vice from souring into severity.


Addison.

Source (?), n. [OE. sours, OF. sourse, surse, sorse, F. source, fr. OF.
sors, p. p. of OF. sordre, surdre, sourdre, to spring forth or up, F.
sourdre, fr. L. surgere to lift or raise up, to spring up. See Surge,
and cf. Souse to plunge or swoop as a bird upon its prey.] 1. The act
of rising; a rise; an ascent. [Obs.]

    Therefore right as an hawk upon a sours Up springeth into the air,
    right so prayers . . . Maken their sours to Goddes ears two.


Chaucer.

2. The rising from the ground, or beginning, of a stream of water or
the like; a spring; a fountain.

    Where as the Poo out of a welle small Taketh his firste springing
    and his sours.


Chaucer.

    Kings that rule Behind the hidden sources of the Nile.


Addison.

3. That from which anything comes forth, regarded as its cause or
origin; the person from whom anything originates; first cause.

    This source of ideas every man has wholly in himself.


Locke.

    The source of Newton's light, of Bacon's sense.


Pope.

Syn. -- See Origin.

Sour"crout` (?), n. See Sauerkraut.

Sourde (?), v. i. [F. sourdre. See Source.] To have origin or source;
to rise; to spring. [Obs.]

    Now might men ask whereof that pride sourdeth.


Chaucer.

Sour"ing (?), n. (Bot.) Any sour apple.

Sour"ish, a. Somewhat sour; moderately acid; as, sourish fruit; a
sourish taste.

Sour"krout` (?), n. Same as Sauerkraut.

Sour"ly, adv. In a sour manner; with sourness.

Sour"ness, n. The quality or state of being sour.

Sours (?), n. Source. See Source. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sour"sop` (?), n. (Bot.) The large succulent and slightly acid fruit of
a small tree (Anona muricata) of the West Indies; also, the tree
itself. It is closely allied to the custard apple.

Sour"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) The sorrel tree.

{ Sous, Souse } (F. s; colloq. Eng. sous), n. A corrupt form of Sou.
[Obs.] Colman, the Elder.

Souse (?), n. [OF. sausse. See Sauce.] [Written also souce, sowce, and
sowse.] 1. Pickle made with salt.

2. Something kept or steeped in pickle; esp., the pickled ears, feet,
etc., of swine.

    And he that can rear up a pig in his house, Hath cheaper his bacon,
    and sweeter his souse.


Tusser.

3. The ear; especially, a hog's ear. [Prov. Eng.]

4. The act of sousing; a plunging into water.

Souse, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Soused (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sousing.] [Cf.
F. saucer to wet with sauce. See Souse pickle.] 1. To steep in pickle;
to pickle. "A soused gurnet." Shak.

2. To plunge or immerse in water or any liquid.

    They soused me over head and ears in water.


Addison.

3. To drench, as by an immersion; to wet throughly.

    Although I be well soused in this shower.


Gascoigne.

Souse, v. i. [Probably fr. OF. sors, p. p. of sordre to rise, and first
used of an upward swood, then of a swoop in general, but also confused
with Souse, v. t. See Source.] To swoop or plunge, as a bird upon its
prey; to fall suddenly; to rush with speed; to make a sudden attack.

    For then I viewed his plunge and souse Into the foamy main.


Marston.

    Jove's bird will souse upon the timorous hare.


J. Dryden. Jr.

Souse, v. t. To pounce upon. [R.]

    [The gallant monarch] like eagle o'er his serie towers, To souse
    annoyance that comes near his nest.


Shak.

Souse, n. The act of sousing, or swooping.

    As a falcon fair That once hath failed or her souse full near.


Spenser.

Souse, adv. With a sudden swoop; violently. Young.

Sous"lik (?), n. [F.] (Zoöl.) See Suslik.

Sout (?), n. Soot. [Obs.] Spenser.

||Sou`tache" (?), n. [F.] A kind of narrow braid, usually of silk; --
||also known as Russian braid.

Sout"age (? or ?; 48), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] That in which anything
is packed; bagging, as for hops. [Obs.] Halliwell.

||Sou`tane" (?), n. [F., fr. Sp. sotana, or It. sottana, LL. subtana,
||fr. L. subtus below, beneath, fr. sub under.] (Eccl. Costume) A close
||garnment with straight sleeves, and skirts reaching to the ankles,
||and buttoned in front from top to bottom; especially, the black
||garment of this shape worn by the clergy in France and Italy as their
||daily dress; a cassock.

Sou"ter (?), n. [AS. s&?;t&?;re, fr. It. sutor, fr. suere to sew.] A
shoemaker; a cobbler. [Obs.] Chaucer.

    There is no work better than another to please God: . . . to wash
    dishes, to be a souter, or an apostle, -- all is one.


Tyndale.

Sou"ter*ly, a. Of or pertaining to a cobbler or cobblers; like a
cobbler; hence, vulgar; low. [Obs.]

Sou"ter*rain (?), n. [F. See Subterranean.] A grotto or cavern under
ground. [Obs.] Arbuthnot.

South (?; by sailors sou), n. [OE. south, suþ, AS. sð for sunð; akin to
D. zuid, OHG. sund, G. süd, süden, Icel. suðr, sunnr, Dan. syd, sönden,
Sw. syd, söder, sunnan; all probably akin to E. sun, meaning, the side
towards the sun. &radic;297. See Sun.] 1. That one of the four cardinal
points directly opposite to the north; the region or direction to the
right or direction to the right of a person who faces the east.

2. A country, region, or place situated farther to the south than
another; the southern section of a country. "The queen of the south."
Matt. xii. 42.

3. Specifically: That part of the United States which is south of Mason
and Dixon's line. See under Line.

4. The wind from the south. [Obs.] Shak.

South, a. Lying toward the south; situated at the south, or in a
southern direction from the point of observation or reckoning;
proceeding toward the south, or coming from the south; blowing from the
south; southern; as, the south pole. "At the south entry." Shak.

South-Sea tea (Bot.) See Yaupon.

South, adv. 1. Toward the south; southward.

2. From the south; as, the wind blows south. Bacon.

South (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Southed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Southing.]
1. To turn or move toward the south; to veer toward the south.

2. (Astron.) To come to the meridian; to cross the north and south
line; -- said chiefly of the moon; as, the moon souths at nine.

South*cot"ti*an (?), n. (Eccl. Hist.) A follower of Joanna Southcott
(1750-1814), an Englishwoman who, professing to have received a
miraculous calling, preached and prophesied, and committed many impious
absurdities.

South"down` (?), a. Of or pertaining to the South Downs, a range of
pasture hills south of the Thames, in England.

Southdown sheep (Zoöl.), a celebrated breed of shortwooled, hornless
sheep, highly valued on account of the delicacy of their flesh. So
called from the South Downs where the breed originated.

South"down`, n. A Southdown sheep.

<! p. 1376 !>

South`east" (?; by sailors sou"-), n. The point of the compass equally
distant from the south and the east; the southeast part or region.

South`east (?; by sailors sou"-), a. Of or pertaining to the southeast;
proceeding toward, or coming from, the southeast; as, a southeast
course; a southeast wind.

South`east"er (?), n. A storm, strong wind, or gale coming from the
southeast.

South`east"er, adv. Toward the southeast.

South`east"ern (?), a. Of or pertaining to the southeast;
southeasterly.

{ South`east"ward (?), South`east"ward*ly }, adv. Toward the southeast.

South"er (?), n. A strong wind, gale, or storm from the south.

South"er*li*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being southerly;
direction toward the south.

South"er*ly (?; 277), a. Southern.

South"ern (?; 277), a. [AS. s&?;&?;ern. See South.] Of or pertaining to
the south; situated in, or proceeding from, the south; situated or
proceeding toward the south.

Southern Cross (Astron.), a constellation of the southern hemisphere
containing several bright stars so related in position as to resemble a
cross. -- Southern Fish (Astron.), a constelation of the southern
hemisphere (Piscis Australis) containing the bright star Fomalhaut. --
Southern States (U.S. Hist. & Geog.), the States of the American Union
lying south of Pennsylvania and the Ohio River, with Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Texas. Before the Civil War, Missouri also, being a
slave State, was classed as one of the Southern States.

South"ern, n. A Southerner. [R.]

South"ern*er (?), n. An inhabitant or native of the south, esp. of the
Southern States of North America; opposed to Northerner.

South"ern*li*ness (?), n. Southerliness.

South"ern*ly (?), a. Somewhat southern. -- adv. In a southerly manner
or course; southward.

South"ern*most` (?), a. Farthest south.

South"ern*wood` (?), n. (Bot.) A shrubby species of wormwood (Artemisia
Abrotanum) having aromatic foliage. It is sometimes used in making
beer.

South"ing (?; 277), n. 1. Tendency or progress southward; as, the
southing of the sun. Emerson.

2. The time at which the moon, or other heavenly body, passes the
meridian of a place.

3. (Astron.) Distance of any heavenly body south of the equator; south
declination; south latitude.

4. (Surv. & Navigation) Distance southward from any point departure or
of reckoning, measured on a meridian; -- opposed to northing.

South"ly (?), adv. Southerly. [Obs. & R.]

South"most` (?), a. Farthest toward the south; southernmost. [R.]
Milton.

South"ness, n. A tendency in the end of a magnetic needle to point
toward the south pole. Faraday.

South"ren (?), a. Southern. [Obs.] "I am a Southren man." Chaucer.

South"ron (?), n. An inhabitant of the more southern part of a country;
formerly, a name given in Scotland to any Englishman.

South"say` (?), v. i. See Soothsay. [Obs.]

South"say`er (?), n. See Soothsayer. [Obs.]

South` south"er*ly (?). (Zoöl.) the old squaw; -- so called in
imitation of its cry. Called also southerly, and southerland. See under
Old.

{ South"ward (?; colloq. &?;), South"wards (?; colloq. &?;) }, adv.
Toward the south, or toward a point nearer the south than the east or
west point; as, to go southward.

South"ward, a. Toward the south.

South"ward, n. The southern regions or countries; the south. Sir W.
Raleigh.

South"ward*ly, adv. In a southern direction.

South`west (?; colloq. sou"-.), n. The point of the compass equally
from the south and the west; the southwest part or region.

South`west", a. Pertaining to, or in the direction of, the southwest;
proceeding toward the southwest; coming from the southwest; as, a
southwest wind.

South`west"er (?; colloq. &?;), n. 1. A storm, gale, or strong wind
from the southwest.

2. A hat made of painted canvas, oiled cloth, or the like, with a flap
at the back, -- worn in stormy weather.

South`west"er*ly, a. To ward or from the southwest; as, a southwesterly
course; a southwesterly wind.

South`west"ern (?), a. Of or pertaining to the southwest;
southwesterly; as, to sail a southwestern course.

{ South`west"ward (?), South`west"ward*ly }, adv. Toward the southwest.

{ Sou"ve*nance (?), So"ve*naunce (?), } n. [F. souvenance.]
Remembrance. [Obs.]

    Of his way he had no sovenance.


Spenser.

Sou`ve*nir (? or ?), n. [F., fr. souvenir to remember, fr. L. subvenire
to come up, come to mind; sub under + venire to come, akin to E. come.
See Come, and cf. Subvention.] That which serves as a reminder; a
remembrancer; a memento; a keepsake.

Sov"er*eign (? or ?; 277), a. [OE. soverain, sovereyn, OF. soverain,
suvrain, F. souverain, LL. superanus, fr. L. superus that is above,
upper, higher, fr. super above. See Over, Super, and cf. Soprano. The
modern spelling is due to a supposed connection with reign.] 1. Supreme
or highest in power; superior to all others; chief; as, our sovereign
prince.

2. Independent of, and unlimited by, any other; possessing, or entitled
to, original authority or jurisdiction; as, a sovereign state; a
sovereign discretion.

3. Princely; royal. "Most sovereign name." Shak.

    At Babylon was his sovereign see.


Chaucer.

4. Predominant; greatest; utmost; paramount.

    We acknowledge him [God] our sovereign good.


Hooker.

5. Efficacious in the highest degree; effectual; controlling; as, a
sovereign remedy. Dryden.

    Such a sovereign influence has this passion upon the regulation of
    the lives and actions of men.


South.

Sovereign state, a state which administers its own government, and is
not dependent upon, or subject to, another power.

Sov"er*eign (? or ?; 277), n. 1. The person, body, or state in which
independent and supreme authority is vested; especially, in a monarchy,
a king, queen, or emperor.

    No question is to be made but that the bed of the Mississippi
    belongs to the sovereign, that is, to the nation.


Jefferson.

2. A gold coin of Great Britain, on which an effigy of the head of the
reigning king or queen is stamped, valued at one pound sterling, or
about $4.86.

3. (Zoöl.) Any butterfly of the tribe Nymphalidi, or genus Basilarchia,
as the ursula and the viceroy.

Syn. -- King; prince; monarch; potentate; emperor.

Sov"er*eign*ize (?), v. i. To exercise supreme authority. [Obs.] Sir T.
Herbert.

Sov"er*eign*ly, adv. In a sovereign manner; in the highest degree;
supremely. Chaucer.

Sov"er*eign*ty (?), n.; pl. Sovereignties (#). [OE. soverainetee, OF.
sovraineté, F. souveraineté.] The quality or state of being sovereign,
or of being a sovereign; the exercise of, or right to exercise, supreme
power; dominion; sway; supremacy; independence; also, that which is
sovereign; a sovereign state; as, Italy was formerly divided into many
sovereignties.

    Woman desiren to have sovereignty As well over their husband as
    over their love.


Chaucer.

Sov"ran (?), a. A variant of Sovereign. [Poetic]

    On thy bald, awful head, O sovran Blanc.


Coleridge.

Sow (?), v. i. To sew. See Sew. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sow (?), n. [OE. sowe, suwe, AS. sugu, akin to s, D. zog, zeug, OHG. s,
G. sau, Icel. sr, Dan. so, Sw. sugga, so, L. sus. Gr. "y^s, sy^s, Zend.
hu boar; probably from the root seen in Skr. s to beget, to bear; the
animal being named in allusion to its fecundity. &radic;294. Cf. Hyena,
Soil to stain, Son, Swine.] 1. (Zoöl.) The female of swine, or of the
hog kind.

2. (Zoöl.) A sow bug.

3. (Metal.) (a) A channel or runner which receives the rows of molds in
the pig bed. (b) The bar of metal which remains in such a runner. (c) A
mass of solidified metal in a furnace hearth; a salamander.

4. (Mil.) A kind of covered shed, formerly used by besiegers in filling
up and passing the ditch of a besieged place, sapping and mining the
wall, or the like. Craig.

Sow bread. (Bot.) See Cyclamen. -- Sow bug, or Sowbug (Zoöl.), any one
of numerous species of terrestrial Isopoda belonging to Oniscus,
Porcellio, and allied genera of the family Oniscidæ. They feed chiefly
on decaying vegetable substances. -- Sow thistle [AS. sugepistel]
(Bot.), a composite plant (Sonchus oleraceus) said to be eaten by swine
and some other animals.

Sow (?), v. t. [imp. Sowed (?); p. p. Sown (?) or Sowed; p. pr. & vb.
n. Sowing.] [OE. sowen, sawen, AS. swan; akin to OFries. s&?;a, D.
zaaijen, OS. & HG. sjan, G. säen, Icel. s, Sw. så, Dan. saae, Goth.
saian, Lith. sti, Russ. sieiate, L. serere, sevi. Cf. Saturday, Season,
Seed, Seminary.] 1. To scatter, as seed, upon the earth; to plant by
strewing; as, to sow wheat. Also used figuratively: To spread abroad;
to propagate. "He would sow some difficulty." Chaucer.

    A sower went forth to sow; and when he sowed, some seeds fell by
    the wayside.


Matt. xiii. 3, 4.

    And sow dissension in the hearts of brothers.


Addison.

2. To scatter seed upon, in, or over; to supply or stock, as land, with
seeds. Also used figuratively: To scatter over; to besprinkle.

    The intellectual faculty is a goodly field, . . . and it is the
    worst husbandry in the world to sow it with trifles.


Sir M. Hale.

    [He] sowed with stars the heaven.


Milton.

    Now morn . . . sowed the earth with orient pearl.


Milton.

Sow, v. i. To scatter seed for growth and the production of a crop; --
literally or figuratively.

    They that sow in tears shall reap in joi.


Ps. cxxvi. 5.

Sow"ans (? or ?), n. pl. See Sowens.

Sow"ar (?), n. [Per. sawr a horseman.] In India, a mounted soldier.

Sow"bane` (?), n. (Bot.) The red goosefoot (Chenopodium rubrum), --
said to be fatal to swine.

Sowce (?), n. & v. See Souse. [Obs.]

Sow"dan (?), n. [F. soudan. See Soldan.] Sultan. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sow"dan*esse` (?), n. A sultaness. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sow"ens (? or ?), n. pl. [Scottish; cf. AS. seáw juice, glue, paste.] A
nutritious article of food, much used in Scotland, made from the husk
of the oat by a process not unlike that by which common starch is made;
-- called flummery in England. [Written also sowans, and sowins.]

Sow"er (?), n. One who, or that which, sows.

Sow"ins (? or ?), n. pl. See Sowens.

{ Sowl, Sowle } (?), v. t. [Cf. prov. G. zaulen, zauseln, G. zausen to
tug, drag.] To pull by the ears; to drag about. [Obs.] hak.

Sowl, v. i. See Soul, v. i. [Obs.]

Sown (?), p. p. of Sow.

Sowne (?), v. t. & i. To sound. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sowse (?), n. & v. See Souse. [Obs.] ryden.

Sow"ter (?), n. See Souter. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Soy (?), n. [Chinese shy.] 1. A Chinese and Japanese liquid sauce for
fish, etc., made by subjecting boiled beans (esp. soja beans), or beans
and meal, to long fermentation and then long digestion in salt and
water.

2. (Bot.) The soja, a kind of bean. See Soja.

Soyle (?), v. t. [Aphetic form of assoil.] To solve, to clear up; as,
to soyl all other texts. [Obs.] Tyndate.

Soyle, n. [Cf. Soil to feed.] Prey. [Obs.] Spenser.

Soyn"ed (? or ?), a. [F. soigner to care.] Filled with care; anxious.
[Obs.] Mir. for Mag.

Soz"zle (?), v. t. [Freq. from soss, v.] 1. To splash or wet
carelessly; as, to sozzle the feet in water. [Local, U.S.] Bartlett.

2. To heap up in confusion. [Prov. Eng.] Forby.

Soz"zle, n. 1. One who spills water or other liquids carelessly;
specifically, a sluttish woman. [Local, U.S.]

2. A mass, or heap, confusedly mingled. [Prov. Eng.]

Spa (?; 277), n. A spring or mineral water; -- so called from a place
of this name in Belgium.

Spaad (?), n. [Cf. G. spath spar. See Spar the mineral.] (Min.) A kind
of spar; earth flax, or amianthus. [Obs.] oodward.

Space (sps), n. [OE. space, F. espace, from L. spatium space; cf. Gr.
spa^n to draw, to tear; perh. akin to E. span. Cf. Expatiate.] 1.
Extension, considered independently of anything which it may contain;
that which makes extended objects conceivable and possible.

    Pure space is capable neither of resistance nor motion.


Locke.

2. Place, having more or less extension; room.

    They gave him chase, and hunted him as hare; Long had he no space
    to dwell [in].


R. of Brunne.

    While I have time and space.


Chaucer.

3. A quantity or portion of extension; distance from one thing to
another; an interval between any two or more objects; as, the space
between two stars or two hills; the sound was heard for the space of a
mile.

    Put a space betwixt drove and drove.


Gen. xxxii. 16.

4. Quantity of time; an interval between two points of time; duration;
time. "Grace God gave him here, this land to keep long space." R. of
brunne.

    Nine times the space that measures day and night.


Milton.

    God may defer his judgments for a time, and give a people a longer
    space of repentance.


Tillotson.

5. A short time; a while. [R.] "To stay your deadly strife a space."
Spenser.

6. Walk; track; path; course. [Obs.]

    This ilke [same] monk let old things pace, And held after the new
    world the space.


Chaucer.

7. (print.) (a) A small piece of metal cast lower than a face type, so
as not to receive the ink in printing, -- used to separate words or
letters. (b) The distance or interval between words or letters in the
lines, or between lines, as in books.

Spaces are of different thicknesses to enable the compositor to arrange
the words at equal distances from each other in the same line.

8. (Mus.) One of the intervals, or open places, between the lines of
the staff.

Absolute space, Euclidian space, etc. See under Absolute, Euclidian,
etc. -- Space line (Print.), a thin piece of metal used by printers to
open the lines of type to a regular distance from each other, and for
other purposes; a lead. Hansard. -- Space rule (Print.), a fine, thin,
short metal rule of the same height as the type, used in printing short
lines in tabular matter.

Space, v. i. [Cf. OF. espacier, L. spatiari. See Space, n.] To walk; to
rove; to roam. [Obs.]

    And loved in forests wild to space.


Spenser.

Space, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spaced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spacong (?).]
[Cf. F. espacer. See Space, n.] (Print.) To arrange or adjust the
spaces in or between; as, to space words, lines, or letters.

Space"ful (?), a. Wide; extensive. Sandys.

Space"less, a. Without space. Coleridge.

Spa"cial (?), a. See Spatial.

Spa"cial*ly, adv. See Spatially. Sir W. Hamilton.

Spa"cious (?), a. [L. spatiousus: cf. F. spacieux. See Space, n.] 1.
Extending far and wide; vast in extent. "A spacious plain outstretched
in circuit wide." Milton.

2. Inclosing an extended space; having large or ample room; not
contracted or narrow; capacious; roomy; as, spacious bounds; a spacious
church; a spacious hall. -- Spa"cious*ly, adv. -- Spa"cious*ness, n.

||Spa`das`sin" (?), n. [F., fr. It. spadaccino a swordsman, from spada
||a sword.] A bravo; a bully; a duelist. Ld. Lytton.

Spad"dle (?), n. A little spade. [Obs.]

Spade (?), n. [Cf. Spay, n.] 1. (Zoöl.) A hart or stag three years old.
[Written also spaid, spayade.]

2. [Cf. L. spado.] A castrated man or beast.

Spade, n. [AS. spæd; spada; akin to D. spade, G. spaten, Icel. spaði,
Dan. & Sw. spade, L. spatha a spatula, a broad two-edged sword, a
spathe, Gr. spa`qh. Cf. Epaulet, Spade at cards, Spathe, Spatula.] 1.
An implement for digging or cutting the ground, consisting usually of
an oblong and nearly rectangular blade of iron, with a handle like that
of a shovel. "With spade and pickax armed." Milton.

2. [Sp. espada, literally, a sword; -- so caused because these cards
among the Spanish bear the figure of a sword. Sp. espada is fr. L.
spatha, Gr. spa`qh. See the Etymology above.] One of that suit of cards
each of which bears one or more figures resembling a spade.

    "Let spades be trumps!" she said.


Pope.

3. A cutting instrument used in flensing a whale.

Spade bayonet, a bayonet with a broad blade which may be used digging;
-- called also trowel bayonet. -- Spade handle (Mach.), the forked end
of a connecting rod in which a pin is held at both ends. See Illust. of
Knuckle joint, under Knuckle.

<! p. 1377 !>

Spade (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spaded; p. pr. & vb. n. Spading.] To dig
with a spade; to pare off the sward of, as land, with a spade.

Spade"bone` (&?;), n. Shoulder blade. [Prov. Eng.]

Spade"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) An American market fish (Chætodipterus
faber) common on the southern coasts; -- called also angel fish,
moonfish, and porgy.

Spade"foot` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of burrowing toads of the genus
Scaphiopus, esp. S. Holbrookii, of the Eastern United States; -- called
also spade toad.

Spade"ful (?), n.; pl. Spadefuls (#). [Spade + full.] As much as a
spade will hold or lift.

Spad"er (?), n. One who, or that which, spades; specifically, a digging
machine.

Spa*di"ceous (?), a. [L. spadix, -icis, a date-brown or nut-brown
color. See Spadix.] 1. Of a bright clear brown or chestnut color. Sir
T. Browne.

2. (Bot.) Bearing flowers on a spadix; of the nature of a spadix.

Spa"di*cose` (?), a. (Bot.) Spadiceous.

Spa*dille" (?), n. [F., fr. Sp. espadilla, dim. of espada. See Spade a
card.] (Card Playing) The ace of spades in omber and quadrille.

Spa"dix (?), n.; pl. L. Spadices (#), E. Spadixes (#). [L., a palm
branch broken off, with its fruit, Gr. &?;.] 1. (Bot.) A fleshy spike
of flowers, usually inclosed in a leaf called a spathe.

2. (Zoöl.) A special organ of the nautilus, due to a modification of
the posterior tentacles.

||Spa"do (?), n.; pl. Spadones (#). [L., fr. Gr. &?;.] 1. Same as
||Spade, 2.

2. (Law) An impotent person.

Spa*droon" (?), n. [Cf. F. & Sp. espadon, It. spadone. See Espadon,
Spade.] A sword, especially a broadsword, formerly used both to cut and
thrust.

Spae (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Spaed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spaeing.]
[Scot. spae, spay, to foretell, to divine, Icel. sp.] To foretell; to
divine. [Scot.]

Spae"man (?), n. A prophet; a diviner. [Scot.]

Spae"wife` (?), n. A female fortune teller. [Scot.]

||Spa*ghet"ti (?), n. [It.] A variety or macaroni made in tubes of
||small diameter.

{ Spa*gyr"ic (?), Spa*gyr"ic*al (?) }, a. [LL. sparygicus, fr. Gr. &?;
to draw, to separate + &?; to assemble; cf. F. spagirique.] Chemical;
alchemical. [Obs.]

Spa*gyr"ic, n. A spagyrist. [Obs.] Bp. Hall.

Spag"y*rist (?), n. [Cf. F. spagiriste.] 1. A chemist, esp. one devoted
to alchemistic pursuits. [Obs.]

2. One of a sect which arose in the days of alchemy, who sought to
discover remedies for disease by chemical means. The spagyrists
historically preceded the iatrochemists. Encyc. Brit.

{ ||Spa"hi (?), ||Spa"hee }, n. [Per., Turk., & Hind. siph: cf. F.
spahi. See Seroy.] 1. Formerly, one of the Turkish cavalry.

2. An Algerian cavalryman in the French army.

Spaid (?), n. See 1st Spade.

Spake (?), archaic imp. of Speak.

Spake"net` (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] A net for catching crabs.
Halliwell.

Spak"y (?), a. Specky. [Obs.] hapman.

Spald"ing knife` (?). A spalting knife.

Spale (?), n. [Cf. Spell a splinter.] 1. A lath; a shaving or chip, as
of wood or stone. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

2. (Shipbuilding) A strengthening cross timber.

Spall (?), n. [OF. espaule; cf. It. spalla. See Epaule.] The shoulder.
[Obs.] Spenser.

Spall, n. [Prov. E. spall, spell. See Spale, Spell a splinter.] A chip
or fragment, especially a chip of stone as struck off the block by the
hammer, having at least one feather-edge.

Spall, v. t. 1. (Mining) To break into small pieces, as ore, for the
purpose of separating from rock. Pryce.

2. (Masonry) To reduce, as irregular blocks of stone, to an
approximately level surface by hammering.

Spall, v. i. To give off spalls, or wedge-shaped chips; -- said of
stone, as when badly set, with the weight thrown too much on the outer
surface.

Spal"peen (?), n. [Ir. spailpin, fr. spailp a beau, pride,
self-conceit.] A scamp; an Irish term for a good-for-nothing fellow; --
often used in good-humored contempt or ridicule. [Colloq.]

Spalt (?), n. [Cf. G. spaltstein, from spalten to split. See 1st
Spell.] (Metal.) Spelter. [Colloq.]

Spalt, a. [See 1st Spell.] 1. Liable to break or split; brittle; as,
spalt timber. [Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

2. Heedless; clumsy; pert; saucy. [Prov. Eng.]

Spalt, v. t. & i. [Cf. OE. spalden. See Spalt, a.] To split off; to
cleave off, as chips from a piece of timber, with an ax. [Prov. Eng. &
Local, U.S.]

Spalt"ing knife` (?). A knife used in splitting codfish. [Written also
spalding knife.]

Span (?), archaic imp. & p. p. of Spin.

Span, n. [AS. spann; akin to D. span, OHG. spanna, G. spanne, Icel.
spönn. &radic;170. See Span, v. t. ] 1. The space from the thumb to the
end of the little finger when extended; nine inches; eighth of a
fathom.

2. Hence, a small space or a brief portion of time.

    Yet not to earth's contracted span Thy goodness let me bound.


Pope.

    Life's but a span; I'll every inch enjoy.


Farquhar.

3. The spread or extent of an arch between its abutments, or of a beam,
girder, truss, roof, bridge, or the like, between its supports.

4. (Naut.) A rope having its ends made fast so that a purchase can be
hooked to the bight; also, a rope made fast in the center so that both
ends can be used.

5. [Cf. D. span, Sw. spann, Dan. spænd, G. gespann. See Span, v. t. ] A
pair of horses or other animals driven together; usually, such a pair
of horses when similar in color, form, and action.

Span blocks (Naut.), blocks at the topmast and topgallant-mast heads,
for the studding-sail halyards. -- Span counter, an old English child's
game, in which one throws a counter on the ground, and another tries to
hit it with his counter, or to get his counter so near it that he can
span the space between them, and touch both the counters. Halliwell.
"Henry V., in whose time boys went to span counter for French crowns."
Shak. -- Span iron (Naut.), a special kind of harpoon, usually secured
just below the gunwale of a whaleboat. -- Span roof, a common roof,
having two slopes and one ridge, with eaves on both sides. Gwilt. --
Span shackle (Naut.), a large bolt driven through the forecastle deck,
with a triangular shackle in the head to receive the heel of the
old-fashioned fish davit. Ham. Nav. Encyc.

Span (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spanned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spanning.]
[AS. pannan; akin to D. & G. spannen, OHG. spannan, Sw. spänna, Dan.
spænde, Icel. spenna, and perh. to Gr. &?; to draw, to drag, L. spatium
space. &radic;170. Cf. Spin, v. t., Space, Spasm.] 1. To measure by the
span of the hand with the fingers extended, or with the fingers
encompassing the object; as, to span a space or distance; to span a
cylinder.

    My right hand hath spanned the heavens.


Isa. xiviii. 13.

2. To reach from one side of to the order; to stretch over as an arch.

    The rivers were spanned by arches of solid masonry.


prescott.

3. To fetter, as a horse; to hobble.

Span, v. i. To be matched, as horses. [U. S.]

||Spa*næ"mi*a (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?; scarce + &?; blood.] (Med.) A
||condition of impoverishment of the blood; a morbid state in which the
||red corpuscles, or other important elements of the blood, are
||deficient.

Spa*næ"mic (? or ?), a. (Med.) Of or pertaining to spanæmia; having
impoverished blood.

Span"cel (?), n. [Perhaps span + AS. sl a rope.] A rope used for tying
or hobbling the legs of a horse or cow. [Prov. Eng. & Local, U.S.]
Grose.

Span"cel, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spanceled (?) or Spancelled; p. pr. & vb.
n. Spanceling or Spancelling.] To tie or hobble with a spancel. [Prov.
Eng. & Local, U.S.] Malone.

Span"dogs` (?), n. pl. A pair of grappling dogs for hoisting logs and
timber.

Span"drel (?), n. [From Span.] 1. (Arch.) The irregular triangular
space between the curve of an arch and the inclosing right angle; or
the space between the outer moldings of two contiguous arches and a
horizontal line above them, or another arch above and inclosing them.

2. A narrow mat or passe partout for a picture. [Cant]

Spane (?), v. t. [Akin to G. spänen, LG. & D. spennen, AS. spanu a
teat.] To wean. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Spang (?), v. t. To spangle. [Obs.]

Spang, v. i. To spring; to bound; to leap. [Scot.]

    But when they spang o'er reason's fence, We smart for't at our own
    expense.


Ramsay.

Spang, n. A bound or spring. [Scot.] Sir W. Scott.

Spang, n. [AS. spange a clasp or fastening; akin to D. spang, G.
spange, OHG. spanga, Icel. spöng a spangle.] A spangle or shining
ornament. [Obs.]

    With glittering spangs that did like stars appear.


Spenser.

Span"gle (?), n. [OE. spangel, dim. of AS. spange. See Spang a
spangle.] 1. A small plate or boss of shining metal; something
brilliant used as an ornament, especially when stitched on the dress.

2. Figuratively, any little thing that sparkless. "The rich spangles
that adorn the sky." Waller.

Oak spangle. See under Oak.

Span"gle, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spangled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spangling
(?).] To set or sprinkle with, or as with, spangles; to adorn with
small, distinct, brilliant bodies; as, a spangled breastplate. Donne.

    What stars do spangle heaven with such beauty?


Shak.

Spangled coquette (Zoöl.), a tropical humming bird (Lophornis reginæ).
See Coquette, 2.

Span"gle, v. i. To show brilliant spots or points; to glisten; to
glitter.

    Some men by feigning words as dark as mine Make truth to spangle,
    and its rays to shine.


Bunyan.

Span"gler (?), n. One who, or that which, spangles.

Span"gly (?), a. Resembling, or consisting of, spangles; glittering;
as, spangly light.

Span"iard (?), n. A native or inhabitant of Spain.

Span"iel (?), n. [OF. espagneul, F. épagneul, espagnol Spanish, Sp.
españnol, fr. España Spain, from L. Hispania.] 1. (Zoöl.) One of a
breed of small dogs having long and thick hair and large drooping ears.
The legs are usually strongly feathered, and the tail bushy. See
Illust. under Clumber, and Cocker.

There are several varieties of spaniels, some of which, known as field
spaniels, are used in hunting; others are used for toy or pet dogs, as
the Blenheim spaniel, and the King Charles spaniel (see under
Blenheim). Of the field spaniels, the larger kinds are called
springers, and to these belong the Sussex, Norfolk, and Clumber
spaniels (see Clumber). The smaller field spaniels, used in hunting
woodcock, are called cocker spaniels (see Cocker). Field spaniels are
remarkable for their activity and intelligence.

    As a spaniel she will on him leap.


Chaucer.

2. A cringing, fawning person. Shak.

Span"iel (?), a. Cringing; fawning. Shak.

Span"iel, v. i. To fawn; to cringe; to be obsequious. [R.] Churchill.

Span"iel, v. t. To follow like a spaniel. [R.]

Span"ish (?), a. Of or pertaining to Spain or the Spaniards.

Spanish bayonet (Bot.), a liliaceous plant (Yucca alorifolia) with
rigid spine-tipped leaves. The name is also applied to other similar
plants of the Southwestern United States and mexico. Called also
Spanish daggers. -- Spanish bean (Bot.) See the Note under Bean. --
Spanish black, a black pigment obtained by charring cork. Ure. --
Spanish broom (Bot.), a leguminous shrub (Spartium junceum) having many
green flexible rushlike twigs. -- Spanish brown, a species of earth
used in painting, having a dark reddish brown color, due to the
presence of sesquioxide of iron. -- Spanish buckeye (Bot.), a small
tree (Ungnadia speciosa) of Texas, New Mexico, etc., related to the
buckeye, but having pinnate leaves and a three-seeded fruit. -- Spanish
burton (Naut.), a purchase composed of two single blocks. A double
Spanish burton has one double and two single blocks. Luce (Textbook of
Seamanship). -- Spanish chalk (Min.), a kind of steatite; -- so called
because obtained from Aragon in Spain. -- Spanish cress (Bot.), a
cruciferous plant (lepidium Cadamines), a species of peppergrass. --
Spanish curiew (Zoöl.), the long-billed curlew. [U.S.] -- Spanish
daggers (Bot.) See Spanish bayonet. -- Spanish elm (Bot.), a large West
Indian tree (Cordia Gerascanthus) furnishing hard and useful timber. --
Spanish feretto, a rich reddish brown pigment obtained by calcining
copper and sulphur together in closed crucibles. -- Spanish flag
(Zoöl.), the California rockfish (Sebastichthys rubrivinctus). It is
conspicuously colored with bands of red and white. -- Spanish fly
(Zoöl.), a brilliant green beetle, common in the south of Europe, used
for raising blisters. See Blister beetle under Blister, and Cantharis.
-- Spanish fox (Naut.), a yarn twisted against its lay. -- Spanish
grass. (Bot.) See Esparto. -- Spanish juice (Bot.), licorice. --
Spanish leather. See Cordwain. -- Spanish mackerel. (Zoöl.) (a) A
species of mackerel (Scomber colias) found both in Europe and America.
In America called chub mackerel, big-eyed mackerel, and bull mackerel.
(b) In the United States, a handsome mackerel having bright yellow
round spots (Scomberomorus maculatus), highly esteemed as a food fish.
The name is sometimes erroneously applied to other species. See Illust.
under Mackerel. -- Spanish main, the name formerly given to the
southern portion of the Caribbean Sea, together with the contiguous
coast, embracing the route traversed by Spanish treasure ships from the
New to the Old World. -- Spanish moss. (Bot.) See Tillandsia. --
Spanish needles (Bot.), a composite weed (Bidens bipinnata) having
achenia armed with needlelike awns. -- Spanish nut (Bot.), a bulbous
plant (Iris Sisyrinchium) of the south of Europe. -- Spanish potato
(Bot.), the sweet potato. See under Potato. -- Spanish red, an ocherous
red pigment resembling Venetian red, but slightly yellower and warmer.
Fairholt. -- Spanish reef (Naut.), a knot tied in the head of a
jib-headed sail. -- Spanish sheep (Zoöl.), a merino. -- Spanish white,
an impalpable powder prepared from chalk by pulverizing and repeated
washings, -- used as a white pigment. -- Spanish windlass (Naut.), a
wooden roller, with a rope wound about it, into which a marline spike
is thrust to serve as a lever.

Span"ish, n. The language of Spain.

Spank (&?;), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spanked (&?;); p. pr. & vb. n.
Spanking.] [Of unknown origin; cf. LG. spakken, spenkern, to run and
spring about quickly.] To strike, as the breech, with the open hand; to
slap.

Spank, n. A blow with the open hand; a slap.

Spank, v. i. To move with a quick, lively step between a trot and
gallop; to move quickly. Thackeray.

Spank"er (?), n. 1. One who spanks, or anything used as an instrument
for spanking.

2. (Naut.) The after sail of a ship or bark, being a fore-and-aft sail
attached to a boom and gaff; -- sometimes called driver. See Illust.
under Sail. Totten.

3. One who takes long, quick strides in walking; also, a fast horse.
[Colloq.]

4. Something very large, or larger than common; a whopper, as a stout
or tall person. [Colloq.]

Spanker boom (Naut.), a boom to which a spanker sail is attached. See
Illust. of Ship.

Spank"er, n. A small coin. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Spank"ing, a. 1. Moving with a quick, lively pace, or capable of so
doing; dashing.

    Four spanking grays ready harnessed.


G. Colman, the Younger.

2. Large; considerable. [Colloq.]

Spanking breeze (Naut.), a strong breeze.

Span"less (?), a. Incapable of being spanned.

Span"ner (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, spans.

2. The lock of a fusee or carbine; also, the fusee or carbine itself.
[Obs.]

3. An iron instrument having a jaw to fit a nut or the head of a bolt,
and used as a lever to turn it with; a wrench; specifically, a wrench
for unscrewing or tightening the couplings of hose.

4. pl. A contrivance in some of the ealier steam engines for moving the
valves for the alternate admission and shutting off of the steam.

Span"-new` (?), a. [Icel. spnn&?;r, properly, new as a ship just split;
spnn chip + n&?;r new. See Spoon, and New.] Quite new; brand-new;
fire-new. "A span- new archbishop's chair." Fuller.

Span"nish*ing (?), n. [From OF. espanir to spread, F. épanou&?;. See
Expand.] The full blooming of a flower. [Obs.] Rom. of R.

Span"piece (?), n. (Arch.) The collar of a roof; sparpiece.

Span"worm` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The larva of any geometrid moth, as the
cankeworm; a geometer; a measuring worm.

<! p. 1378 !>

Spar (?), n. [AS. spær in spærstn chalkstone; akin to MHG. spar, G.
sparkalk plaster.] (Min.) An old name for a nonmetallic mineral,
usually cleavable and somewhat lustrous; as, calc spar, or calcite,
fluor spar, etc. It was especially used in the case of the gangue
minerals of a metalliferous vein.

Blue spar, Cube spar, etc. See under Blue, Cube, etc.

Spar, n. [OE. sparre; akin to D. spar, G. sparren, OHG. sparro, Dan.&
Sw. sparre, Icel. sparri; of uncertain origin. &?; 171. Cf. Spar, v. t.
] 1. (Naut.) A general term any round piece of timber used as a mast,
yard, boom, or gaff.

2. (Arch.) Formerly, a piece of timber, in a general sense; -- still
applied locally to rafters.

3. The bar of a gate or door. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Spar buoy (Naut.), a buoy anchored by one end so that the other end
rises above the surface of the water. -- Spar deck (Naut.), the upper
deck of a vessel; especially, in a frigate, the deck which is continued
in a straight line from the quarter-deck to the forecastle, and on
which spare spars are usually placed. See under Deck. -- Spar torpedo
(Naut.), a torpedo carried on the end of a spar usually projecting from
the bow of a vessel, and intended to explode upon contact with an
enemy's ships.

Spar, v. t. [OE. sparren, AS. sparrian; akin to G. sperren, Icel.
sperra; from the noun. &radic;171. See Spara beam, bar.] 1. To bolt; to
bar. [Obs.] Chaucer.

2. To To supply or equip with spars, as a vessel.

A vessel equipped with spars that are too large or too small is said to
be oversparred or undersparred.

Spar, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sparred (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sparring.] [Of
uncertain origin; cf. OF. esparer to kick, F. éparer, or Icel. sperra
to stretch out the legs, to struggle.] 1. To strike with the feet or
spurs, as cocks do.

2. To use the fists and arms scientifically in attack or defense; to
contend or combat with the fists, as for exercise or amusement; to box.

    Made believe to spar at Paul with great science.


Dickens.

3. To contest in words; to wrangle. [Colloq.]

Spar, n. 1. A contest at sparring or boxing.

2. A movement of offense or defense in boxing.

Spar"a*ble (?), n. [Corrupted from sparrow bill.] A kind of small nail
used by shoemakers.

Spar"a*da (?), n. (Zoöl.) A small California surf fish (Micrometrus
aggregatus); -- called also shiner.

Spar"a*drap (?), n. [F. sparadrap; cf. It. sparadrappo, NL.
sparadrapa.] 1. A cerecloth. [Obs.]

2. (Med.) Any adhesive plaster.

{ Spar"age (?; 48), Spar"a*gus (?), Spar"a*grass` (?) }, n. Obs. or
corrupt forms of Asparagus.

Spar"ble (?), v. t. [OF. esparpiller to scatter, F. éparpiller.] To
scatter; to disperse; to rout. [Obs.]

    The king's host was sparbled and chased.


Fabyan.

Spare (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spared (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sparing.]
[AS. sparian, fr. spær spare, sparing, saving; akin to D. & G. sparen,
OHG. spar&?;n, Icel. & Sw. spara, Dan. spare See Spare, a.] 1. To use
frugally or stintingly, as that which is scarce or valuable; to retain
or keep unused; to save. "No cost would he spare." Chaucer.

    [Thou] thy Father's dreadful thunder didst not spare.


Milton.

    He that hath knowledge, spareth his words.


Prov. xvii. 27.

2. To keep to one's self; to forbear to impart or give.

    Be pleased your plitics to spare.


Dryden.

    Spare my sight the pain Of seeing what a world of tears it costs
    you.


Dryden.

3. To preserve from danger or punishment; to forbear to punish, injure,
or harm; to show mercy to.

    Spare us, good Lord.


Book of Common Prayer.

    Dim sadness did not spare That time celestial visages.


Milton.

    Man alone can whom he conquers spare.


Waller.

4. To save or gain, as by frugality; to reserve, as from some
occupation, use, or duty.

    All the time he could spare from the necessary cares of his weighty
    charge, he &?;estowed on . . . serving of God.


Knolles.

5. To deprive one's self of, as by being frugal; to do without; to
dispense with; to give up; to part with.

    Where angry Jove did never spare One breath of kind and temperate
    air.


Roscommon.

    I could have better spared a better man.


Shak.

To spare one's self. (a) To act with reserve. [Obs.]

    Her thought that a lady should her spare.


Chaucer.

(b) To save one's self labor, punishment, or blame.

Spare (?), v. i. 1. To be frugal; not to be profuse; to live frugally;
to be parsimonious.

    I, who at some times spend, at others spare, Divided between
    carelessness and care.


Pope.

2. To refrain from inflicting harm; to use mercy or forbearance.

    He will not spare in the day of vengeance.


Prov. vi. 34.

3. To desist; to stop; to refrain. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Spare, a. [Compar. Sparer (?); superl. Sparest; -- not used in all the
senses of the word.] [AS. spær sparing. Cf. Spare, v. t. ] 1. Scanty;
not abundant or plentiful; as, a spare diet.

2. Sparing; frugal; parsimonious; chary.

    He was spare, but discreet of speech.


Carew.

3. Being over and above what is necessary, or what must be used or
reserved; not wanted, or not used; superfluous; as, I have no spare
time.

    If that no spare clothes he had to give.


Spenser.

4. Held in reserve, to be used in an emergency; as, a spare anchor; a
spare bed or room.

5. Lean; wanting flesh; meager; thin; gaunt.

    O, give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones.


Shak.

6. Slow. [Obs. or prov. Eng.] Grose.

Spare (?), n. 1. The act of sparing; moderation; restraint. [Obs.]

    Killing for sacrifice, without any spare.


Holland.

2. Parsimony; frugal use. [Obs.] Bacon.

    Poured out their plenty without spite or spare.


Spenser.

3. An opening in a petticoat or gown; a placket. [Obs.]

4. That which has not been used or expended.

5. (Tenpins) The right of bowling again at a full set of pins, after
having knocked all the pins down in less than three bowls. If all the
pins are knocked down in one bowl it is a double spare; in two bowls, a
single spare.

Spare"ful (?), a. Sparing; chary. [Obs.] Fairfax.

-- Spare"ful*ness, n. [Obs.] Sir P. Sidney.

Spare"less, a. Unsparing. Sylvester.

Spare"ly, adv. In a spare manner; sparingly.

Spare"ness, n. [Cf. AS. spærnis frugality.] The quality or state of
being lean or thin; leanness.

Spar"er (?), n. One who spares.

Spare"rib` (?), n. [Spare, a. + rib.] A piece of pork, consisting or
ribs with little flesh on them.

Sparge (?), v. t. [L. spargere; cf. F. asperger.] To sprinkle; to
moisten by sprinkling; as, to sparge paper.

Spar`ge*fac"tion (?), n. [L. spargere to strew + facere, factum, to
make.] The act of sprinkling. [Obs.] Swift.

Spar"ger (?), n. [Cf. F. asperger to sprinkle, L. aspergere, spargere.]
A vessel with a perforated cover, for sprinkling with a liquid; a
sprinkler.

Spar"hawk` (?), n. [OE. sperhauke.] (Zoöl.) The sparrow hawk. [Prov.
Eng.]

Spar"-hung` (?), a. Hung with spar, as a cave.

Spar"ing (?), a. Spare; saving; frugal; merciful. Bacon.

-- Spar"ing*ly, adv. -- Spar"ing*ness, n.

Spark (?), n. [OE. sparke, AS. spearca; akin to D. spark, sperk; cf.
Icel. spraka to crackle, Lith. spragëti, Gr. &?; a bursting with a
noise, Skr. sph&?;rj to crackle, to thunder. Cf. Speak.] 1. A small
particle of fire or ignited substance which is emitted by a body in
combustion.

    Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.


Job v. 7.

2. A small, shining body, or transient light; a sparkle.

3. That which, like a spark, may be kindled into a flame, or into
action; a feeble germ; an elementary principle. "If any spark of life
be yet remaining." Shak. "Small intellectual spark." Macaulay. "Vital
spark of heavenly flame." Pope.

    We have here and there a little clear light, some sparks of bright
    knowledge.


Locke.

    Bright gem instinct with music, vocal spark.


Wordsworth.

Spark arrester, a contrivance to prevent the escape of sparks while it
allows the passage of gas, -- chiefly used in the smokestack of a
wood-burning locomotive. Called also spark consumer. [U.S.]

Spark, n. [Icel. sparkr lively, sprightly.] 1. A brisk, showy, gay man.

    The finest sparks and cleanest beaux.


Prior.

2. A lover; a gallant; a beau.

Spark, v. i. To sparkle. [Obs.] Spenser.

Spark, v. i. To play the spark, beau, or lover.

    A sure sign that his master was courting, or, as it is termed,
    sparking, within.


W. Irwing.

Spark"er (?), n. A spark arrester.

Spark"ful (?), a. Lively; brisk; gay. [Obs.] "Our sparkful youth."
Camden.

Spark"ish, a. 1. Like a spark; airy; gay. W. Walsh.

2. Showy; well-dresed; fine. L'Estrange.

Spar"kle (?), n. [Dim. of spark.] 1. A little spark; a scintillation.

    As fire is wont to quicken and go From a sparkle sprungen amiss,
    Till a city brent up is.


Chaucer.

    The shock was sufficiently strong to strike out some sparkles of
    his fiery temper.


Prescott.

2. Brilliancy; luster; as, the sparkle of a diamond.

Spar"kle, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sparkled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sparkling
(?).] [See Sparkle, n., Spark of fire.] 1. To emit sparks; to throw off
ignited or incandescent particles; to shine as if throwing off sparks;
to emit flashes of light; to scintillate; to twinkle; as, the blazing
wood sparkles; the stars sparkle.

    A mantelet upon his shoulder hanging Bretful of rubies red, as fire
    sparkling.


Chaucer.

2. To manifest itself by, or as if by, emitting sparks; to glisten; to
flash.

    I see bright honor sparkle through your eyes.


Milton.

3. To emit little bubbles, as certain kinds of liquors; to effervesce;
as, sparkling wine.

Syn. -- To shine; glisten; scintillate; radiate; coruscate; glitter;
twinkle.

Spar"kle, v. t. To emit in the form or likeness of sparks. "Did sparkle
forth great light." Spenser.

Spar"kle, v. t. [Cf. Sparble.] 1. To disperse. [Obs.]

    The Landgrave hath sparkled his army without any further
    enterprise.


State Papers.

2. To scatter on or over. [Obs.] Purchas.

Spar"kler (?), n. One who scatters; esp., one who scatters money; an
improvident person. [Obs.]

Spar"kler, n. One who, or that which, sparkles.

Spar"kler, n. (Zoöl.) A tiger beetle.

Spark"let (?), n. A small spark. [Obs.]

Spark"li*ness (?), n. Vivacity. [Obs.] Aubrey.

Spar"kling (?), a. Emitting sparks; glittering; flashing; brilliant;
lively; as, sparkling wine; sparkling eyes. -- Spar"kling*ly, adv. --
Spar"kling*ness, n.

Syn. -- Brilliant; shining. See Shining.

Spar"ling (?), n. [Akin to G. spierling, spiering, D. spiering: cf. F.
éperlan.] (Zoöl.) (a) The European smelt (Osmerus eperlanus). (b) A
young salmon. (c) A tern. [Scot. & Prov. Eng.]

Spar"lyre` (?), n. [AS. spear- lira.] The calf of the leg. [Obs.]
Wyclif (Deut. xxviii. 35).

Spa"roid (?; 277), a. [L. sparus the gilthead + -oid: cf. F. sparoïde.]
(Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Sparidæ, a family of spinous-finned
fishes which includes the scup, sheepshead, and sea bream. -- n. One of
the Sparidæ.

Spar"piece` (?), n. (Arch.) The collar beam of a roof; the spanpiece.
Gwilt.

Spar"poil (?), v. t. [See Sparble.] To scatter; to spread; to disperse.
[Obs.]

Spar"row (?), n. [OE. sparwe, AS. spearwa; akin to OHG. sparo, G.
sperling, Icel. spörr, Dan. spurv, spurre, Sw. sparf, Goth. sparwa; --
originally, probably, the quiverer or flutterer, and akin to E. spurn.
See Spurn, and cf. Spavin.] 1. (Zoöl.) One of many species of small
singing birds of the family Fringilligæ, having conical bills, and
feeding chiefly on seeds. Many sparrows are called also finches, and
buntings. The common sparrow, or house sparrow, of Europe (Passer
domesticus) is noted for its familiarity, its voracity, its attachment
to its young, and its fecundity. See House sparrow, under House.

The following American species are well known; the chipping sparrow, or
chippy, the sage sparrow, the savanna sparrow, the song sparrow, the
tree sparrow, and the white-throated sparrow (see Peabody bird). See
these terms under Sage, Savanna, etc.

2. (Zoöl.) Any one of several small singing birds somewhat resembling
the true sparrows in form or habits, as the European hedge sparrow. See
under Hedge.

    He that doth the ravens feed, Yea, providently caters for the
    sparrow, Be comfort to my age!


Shak.

Field sparrow, Fox sparrow, etc. See under Field, Fox, etc. -- Sparrow
bill, a small nail; a castiron shoe nail; a sparable. -- Sparrow hawk.
(Zoöl.) (a) A small European hawk (Accipiter nisus) or any of the
allied species. (b) A small American falcon (Falco sparverius). (c) The
Australian collared sparrow hawk (Accipiter torquatus). The name is
applied to other small hawks, as the European kestrel and the New
Zealand quail hawk. -- Sparrow owl (Zoöl.), a small owl (Glaucidium
passerinum) found both in the Old World and the New. The name is also
applied to other species of small owls. -- Sparrow spear (Zoöl.), the
female of the reed bunting. [Prov. Eng.]

Spar"row*grass` (?), n. [Corrupted from asparagus.] Asparagus.
[Colloq.] See the Note under Asparagus.

Spar"row*wort` (?), n. (Bot.) An evergreen shrub of the genus Erica (E.
passerina).

Spar"ry (?), a. [From Spar.] Resembling spar, or consisting of spar;
abounding with spar; having a confused crystalline structure; spathose.

Sparry iron (Min.), siderite. See Siderite (a). -- Sparry limestone
(Min.), a coarsely crystalline marble.

Sparse (?), a. [Compar. Sparser (?); superl. Sparsest.] [L. sparsus, p.
p. of spargere to strew, scatter. Cf. Asperse, Disperse.] 1. Thinly
scattered; set or planted here and there; not being dense or close
together; as, a sparse population. Carlyle.

2. (Bot.) Placed irregularly and distantly; scattered; -- applied to
branches, leaves, peduncles, and the like.

Sparse, v. t. [L. sparsus, p. p. of spargere to scatter.] To scatter;
to disperse. [Obs.] Spenser.

Spars"ed*ly (?), adv. Sparsely. [Obs.]

Sparse"ly, adv. In a scattered or sparse manner.

Sparse"ness, n. The quality or state of being sparse; as, sparseness of
population.

||Spar"sim (?), adv. [L., fr. spargere to scatter.] Sparsely;
||scatteredly; here and there.

Spar"tan (?), a. [L. Spartanus.] Of or pertaining to Sparta, especially
to ancient Sparta; hence, hardy; undaunted; as, Spartan souls; Spartan
bravey. -- n. A native or inhabitant of Sparta; figuratively, a person
of great courage and fortitude.

Spar"te*ine (?), n. (Chem.) A narcotic alkaloid extracted from the tops
of the common broom (Cytisus scoparius, formerly Spartium scoparium),
as a colorless oily liquid of aniline-like odor and very bitter taste.

Spar"ter*ie (?), n. [F., from Sp. esparto esparto, L. spartum, Gr.
&?;.] Articles made of the blades or fiber of the Lygeum Spartum and
Stipa (or Macrochloa) tenacissima, kinds of grass used in Spain and
other countries for making ropes, mats, baskets, nets, and mattresses.
Loudon.

Sparth (?), n. [Cf. Icel. spar&?;a.] An Anglo-Saxon battle-ax, or
halberd. [Obs.]

    He hath a sparth of twenty pound of weight.


Chaucer.

<! p. 1379 !>

Sparve (?), n. (Zoöl.) The hedge sparrow. [Prov. Eng.]

Spar"y (?), a. Sparing; parsimonious. [Obs.]

Spasm (?), n. [F. spasme, L. spasmus, Gr. &?;, from &?;, &?;, to draw,
to cause convulsion. Cf. Span, v. t.] 1. (Med.) An involuntary and
unnatural contraction of one or more muscles or muscular fibers.

Spasm are usually either clonic or tonic. In clonic spasm, the muscles
or muscular fibers contract and relax alternately in very quick
succession. In tonic spasm, the contraction is steady and uniform, and
continues for a comparatively long time, as in tetanus.

2. A sudden, violent, and temporary effort or emotion; as, a spasm of
repentance.

Cynic spasm (Med.) See under Cynic. -- Spasm of the chest. See Angina
pectoris, under Angina.

Spas*mat"ic*al (?), a. Spasmodic. [Obs.]

Spas"mod"ic (?), a. [Gr. &?;; &?; a convulsion + &?; likeness: cf. F.
spasmotique.] 1. (Med.) Of or pertaining to spasm; consisting in spasm;
occuring in, or characterized by, spasms; as, a spasmodic asthma.

2. Soon relaxed or exhausted; convulsive; intermittent; as, spasmodic
zeal or industry.

Spasmodic croup (Med.), an affection of childhood characterized by a
stoppage of brathing developed suddenly and without fever, and produced
by spasmodic contraction of the vocal cords. It is sometimes fatal.
Called also laryngismus stridulus, and childcrowing. -- Spasmodic
stricture, a stricture caused by muscular spasm without structural
change. See Organic stricture, under Organic.

Spas*mod"ic, n. (Med.) A medicine for spasm.

Spas*mod"ic*al (?), a. Same as Spasmodic, a. -- Spas*mod"ic*al*ly (#),
adv.

Spas"tic (?), a. [L. spasticus, Gr. &?;, fr. &?; to draw: cf. F.
spastique. See Spasm.] (Med.) Of or pertaining to spasm; spasmodic;
especially, pertaining to tonic spasm; tetanic.

Spas"tic*al*ly (?), adv. Spasmodically.

Spas*tic"i*ty (?), n. 1. A state of spasm.

2. The tendency to, or capability of suffering, spasm.

Spat (?), imp. of Spit. [Obs. or R.]

Spat, n. [From the root of spit; hence, literally, that which is
ejected.] A young oyster or other bivalve mollusk, both before and
after it first becomes adherent, or such young, collectively.

Spat, v. i. & t. To emit spawn; to emit, as spawn.

Spat, n. [Cf. Pat.] 1. A light blow with something flat. [U.S. & Prov.
Eng.]

2. Hence, a petty combat, esp. a verbal one; a little quarrel, dispute,
or dissension. [U. S.]

Spat, v. i. To dispute. [R.] Smart.

Spat, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spatted; p. pr. & vb. n. Spatting.] To slap,
as with the open hand; to clap together; as the hands. [Local, U.S.]

    Little Isabel leaped up and down, spatting her hands.


Judd.

Spa*tan"goid (?), a. (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Spatangoidea. --
n. One of the Spatangoidea.

||Spat`an*goi"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL. See Spatangus, and -oid.] (Zoöl.)
||An order of irregular sea urchins, usually having a more or less
||heart-shaped shell with four or five petal-like ambulacra above. The
||mouth is edentulous and situated anteriorly, on the under side.

||Spa*tan"gus (?), n. [NL., fr. L. spatangius a kind of sea urchin, Gr.
||&?;.] (Zoöl.) A genus of heart-shaped sea urchins belonging to the
||Spatangoidea.

Spatch"cock` (?), n. See Spitchcock.

Spate (?), n. [Of Celtic origin; cf. Ir. speid.] A river flood; an
overflow or inundation. Burns.

    Gareth in a showerful spring Stared at the spate.


Tennyson.

||Spa"tha (?), n.; pl. Spathæ (#). [L.] (Bot.) A spathe.

Spa*tha"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Having a spathe; resembling a spathe;
spathal.

Spa"thal (?), a. (Bot.) Furnished with a spathe; as, spathal flowers.
Howitt.

Spathe (?), n. [L. spatha, Gr. &?;: cf. F. spathe. See Spade for
digging.] (Bot.) A special involucre formed of one leaf and inclosing a
spadix, as in aroid plants and palms. See the Note under Bract, and
Illust. of Spadix.

The name is also given to the several-leaved involucre of the iris and
other similar plants.

Spathed (?), a. (Bot.) Having a spathe or calyx like a sheath.

Spath"ic (?), a. [Cf. F. spathique, fr. F. & G. spath spar.] Like spar;
foliated or lamellar; spathose.

Spathic iron (Min.), siderite. See Siderite (a).

Spath"i*form (?), a. [F. spathiforme.] Resembling spar in form. "The
ocherous, spathiform, and mineralized forms of uranite." Lavoisier
(Trans.).

Spath"ose` (?), a. (Min.) See Spathic.

Spath"ose`, a. [See Spathe.] (Bot.) Having a spathe; resembling a
spathe; spatheceous; spathal.

Spath"ous (?), a. (Bot.) Spathose.

Spath"u*late (?), a. See Spatulate.

Spa"tial (?), a. Of or pertaining to space. "Spatial quantity and
relations." L. H. Atwater.

Spa"tial*ly (?), adv. As regards space.

Spa"ti*ate (?), v. t. [L. spatiatus, p. p. of spatiari, fr. spatiatum.
See Space.] To rove; to ramble. [Obs.] Bacon.

Spat"ter (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spattered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Spattering.] [From the root of spit salvia.] 1. To sprinkle with a
liquid or with any wet substance, as water, mud, or the like; to make
wet of foul spots upon by sprinkling; as, to spatter a coat; to spatter
the floor; to spatter boots with mud.

    Upon any occasion he is to be spattered over with the blood of his
    people.


Burke.

2. To distribute by sprinkling; to sprinkle around; as, to spatter
blood. Pope.

3. Fig.: To injure by aspersion; to defame; to soil; also, to throw out
in a defamatory manner.

Spat"ter, v. i. To throw something out of the mouth in a scattering
manner; to sputter.

    That mind must needs be irrecoverably depraved, which, . . .
    tasting but once of one just deed, spatters at it, and abhors the
    relish ever after.


Milton.

Spat"ter*dashed` (?), a. Wearing spatterdashes. [Colloq.] Thackeray.

Spat"ter*dash`es (?), n. pl. [Spatter + dash.] Coverings for the legs,
to protect them from water and mud; long gaiters.

Spat`ter-dock` (?), n. (Bot.) The common yellow water lily (Nuphar
advena).

Spat"tle (?), n. Spawl; spittle. [Obs.] Bale.

Spat"tle, n. 1. A spatula.

2. (Pottery) A tool or implement for mottling a molded article with
coloring matter Knoght.

Spat"tling-pop"py (?), n. [Prov. E. spattle to spit + E. poppy.] (Bot.)
A kind of catchfly (Silene inflata) which is sometimes frothy from the
action of captured insects.

Spat"u*la (?; 135), n. [L. spatula, spathula, dim. of spatha a spatula:
F. spatule. See Spade for digging.] An implement shaped like a knife,
flat, thin, and somewhat flexible, used for spreading paints, fine
plasters, drugs in compounding prescriptions, etc. Cf. Palette knife,
under Palette.

Spat"u*late (?), a. [NL. spatulatus.] (Nat. Hist.) Shaped like spatula,
or like a battledoor, being roundish, with a long, narrow, linear base.
[Also written spathulate.]

Spauld (?), n. [See Spall the shoulder.] The shoulder. [Scot.]

Spav"in (?), n. [OE. spaveyne, OF. esparvain, F. éparvin; akin to OF.
espervier a sparrow hawk, F. épervier, fr. OHG. sparwri (G. sperber),
fr. OHG. sparo sparrow, because this disease makes the horse raise the
infirm leg in the manner of a sparrow hawk or sparrow. See Sparrow.]
(Far.) A disease of horses characterized by a bony swelling developed
on the hock as the result of inflammation of the bones; also, the
swelling itself. The resulting lameness is due to the inflammation, and
not the bony tumor as popularly supposed. Harbaugh.

Bog spavin, a soft swelling produced by distention of the capsular
ligament of the hock; -- called also blood spavin. -- Bone spavin,
spavin attended with exostosis; ordinary spavin.

Spav"ined (?), a. Affected with spavin.

Spaw (?), n. See Spa.

Spawl (?), n. A splinter or fragment, as of wood or stone. See Spall.

Spawl, n. [Cf. AS. sptl, fr. sptan to spit; probably akin to spwan, E.
spew. Cf. Spew.] Scattered or ejected spittle.

Spawl, v. i. & t. [imp. & p. p. Spawled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spawling.]
[Cf. AS. sptlian.] To scatter spittle from the mouth; to spit, as
saliva.

    Why must he sputter, spawl, and slaver it In vain, against the
    people's favorite.


Swift.

Spawl"ing, n. That which is spawled, or spit out.

Spawn (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spawned (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spawning.]
[OE. spanen, OF. espandre, properly, to shed, spread, L. expandere to
spread out. See Expand.] 1. To produce or deposit (eggs), as fishes or
frogs do.

2. To bring forth; to generate; -- used in contempt.

    One edition [of books] spawneth another.


Fuller.

Spawn, v. i. 1. To deposit eggs, as fish or frogs do.

2. To issue, as offspring; -- used contemptuously.

Spawn, n. [&radic;170. See Spawn, v. t.] 1. The ova, or eggs, of
fishes, oysters, and other aquatic animals.

2. Any product or offspring; -- used contemptuously.

3. (Hort.) The buds or branches produced from underground stems.

4. (Bot.) The white fibrous matter forming the matrix from which fungi.

Spawn eater (Zoöl.), a small American cyprinoid fish (Notropis
Hudsonius) allied to the dace.

Spawn"er (?), n. 1. (Zoöl.) A mature female fish.

    The barbel, for the preservation or their seed, both the spawner
    and the milter, cover their spawn with sand.


Walton.

2. Whatever produces spawn of any kind.

Spay (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spayed (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spaying.]
[Cf. Armor. spac'hein, spaza to geld, W. dyspaddu to geld, L. spado a
eunuch, Gr. &?;.] To remove or extirpate the ovaries of, as a sow or a
bitch; to castrate (a female animal).

Spay, n. [Cf. Spade a spay, Spay, v. t.] (Zoöl.) The male of the red
deer in his third year; a spade.

{ Spay"ad (?), Spay"ade (?) }, n. (Zoöl.) A spay.

Speak (?), v. i. [imp. Spoke (?) (Spake (&?;) Archaic); p. p. Spoken
(?) (Spoke, Obs. or Colloq.); p. pr. & vb. n. Speaking.] [OE. speken,
AS. specan, sprecan; akin to OF.ries. spreka, D. spreken, OS. spreken,
G. sprechen, OHG. sprehhan, and perhaps to Skr. sphrj to crackle, to
thunder. Cf. Spark of fire, Speech.] 1. To utter words or articulate
sounds, as human beings; to express thoughts by words; as, the organs
may be so obstructed that a man may not be able to speak.

    Till at the last spake in this manner.


Chaucer.

    Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth.


1 Sam. iii. 9.

2. To express opinions; to say; to talk; to converse.

    That fluid substance in a few minutes begins to set, as the
    tradesmen speak.


Boyle.

    An honest man, is able to speak for himself, when a knave is not.


Shak.

    During the century and a half which followed the Conquest, there
    is, to speak strictly, no English history.


Macaulay.

3. To utter a speech, discourse, or harangue; to adress a public
assembly formally.

    Many of the nobility made themselves popular by speaking in
    Parliament against those things which were most grateful to his
    majesty.


Clarendon.

4. To discourse; to make mention; to tell.

    Lycan speaks of a part of Cæsar's army that came to him from the
    Leman Lake.


Addison.

5. To give sound; to sound.

    Make all our trumpets speak.


Shak.

6. To convey sentiments, ideas, or intelligence as if by utterance; as,
features that speak of self-will.

    Thine eye begins to speak.


Shak.

To speak of, to take account of, to make mention of. Robynson (More's
Utopia). -- To speak out, to speak loudly and distinctly; also, to
speak unreservedly. -- To speak well for, to commend; to be favorable
to. -- To speak with, to converse with. "Would you speak with me?"
Shak.

Syn. -- To say; tell; talk; converse; discourse; articulate; pronounce;
utter.

Speak (?), v. t. 1. To utter with the mouth; to pronounce; to utter
articulately, as human beings.

    They sat down with him upn ground seven days and seven nights, and
    none spake a word unto him.


Job. ii. 13.

2. To utter in a word or words; to say; to tell; to declare orally; as,
to speak the truth; to speak sense.

3. To declare; to proclaim; to publish; to make known; to exhibit; to
express in any way.

    It is my father;s muste To speak your deeds.


Shak.

    Speaking a still good morrow with her eyes.


Tennyson.

    And for the heaven's wide circuit, let it speak The maker's high
    magnificence.


Milton.

    Report speaks you a bonny monk.


Sir W. Scott.

4. To talk or converse in; to utter or pronounce, as in conversation;
as, to speak Latin.

    And French she spake full fair and fetisely.


Chaucer.

5. To address; to accost; to speak to.

    [He will] thee in hope; he will speak thee fair.


Ecclus. xiii. 6.

    each village senior paused to scan And speak the lovely caravan.


Emerson.

To speak a ship (Naut.), to hail and speak to her captain or commander.

Speak"a*ble (?), a. 1. Capable of being spoken; fit to be spoken.
Ascham.

2. Able to speak. Milton.

Speak"er (?), n. 1. One who speaks. Specifically: (a) One who utters or
pronounces a discourse; usually, one who utters a speech in public; as,
the man is a good speaker, or a bad speaker. (b) One who is the
mouthpiece of others; especially, one who presides over, or speaks for,
a delibrative assembly, preserving order and regulating the debates;
as, the Speaker of the House of Commons, originally, the mouthpiece of
the House to address the king; the Speaker of a House of
Representatives.

2. A book of selections for declamation. [U. S.]

Speak"er*ship, n. The office of speaker; as, the speakership of the
House of Representatives.

Speak"ing, a. 1. Uttering speech; used for conveying speech; as, man is
a speaking animal; a speaking tube.

2. Seeming to be capable of speech; hence, lifelike; as, a speaking
likeness.

A speaking acquaintance, a slight acquaintance with a person, or one
which merely permits the exchange of salutations and remarks on
indifferent subjects. -- Speaking trumpet, an instrument somewhat
resembling a trumpet, by which the sound of the human voice may be so
intensified as to be conveyed to a great distance. -- Speaking tube, a
tube for conveying speech, especially from one room to another at a
distance. -- To be on speaking terms, to be slightly acquainted.

Speak"ing, n. 1. The act of uttering words.

2. Public declamation; oratory.

Spear (?), n. [OE. spere, AS. spere; akin to D. & G. speer, OS. & OHS.
sper, Icel. spjör, pl., Dan. spær, L. sparus.] 1. A long, pointed
weapon, used in war and hunting, by thrusting or throwing; a weapon
with a long shaft and a sharp head or blade; a lance. [See Illust. of
Spearhead.] "A sharp ground spear." Chaucer.

    They shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into
    pruning hooks.


Micah iv. 3.

2. Fig.: A spearman. Sir W. Scott.

3. A sharp-pointed instrument with barbs, used for stabbing fish and
other animals.

4. A shoot, as of grass; a spire.

5. The feather of a horse. See Feather, n., 4.

6. The rod to which the bucket, or plunger, of a pump is attached; a
pump rod.

Spear foot, the off hind foot of a horse. -- Spear grass. (Bot.) (a)
The common reed. See Reed, n., 1. (b) meadow grass. See under Meadow.
-- Spear hand, the hand in which a horseman holds a spear; the right
hand. Crabb. -- Spear side, the male line of a family. Lowell. -- Spear
thistle (Bot.), the common thistle (Cnicus lanceolatus).

Spear, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Speared (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spearing.] To
pierce with a spear; to kill with a spear; as, to spear a fish.

Spear, v. i. To shoot into a long stem, as some plants. See Spire.
Mortimer.

Spear"er (?), n. One who uses a spear; as, a spearer of fish.

Spear"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) A large and powerful fish (Tetrapturus
albidus) related to the swordfish, but having scales and ventral fins.
It is found on the American coast and the Mediterranean. (b) The carp
sucker.

<! p. 1380 !>

Spear"head` (?), n. The pointed head, or end, of a spear.

Spear"man (?), n.; pl. Spearmen (&?;). One who is armed with a spear.
Acts xxiii. 23.

Spear"mint` (?), n. [So named from its spiry, not capitate,
inflorescence. Dr. Prior.] (Bot.) A species of mint (Mentha viridis)
growing in moist soil. It vields an aromatic oil. See Mint, and Mentha.

Spear"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) An Australian tree (Acacia Doratoxylon), and
its tough wood, used by the natives for spears.

Spear"wort` (?), n. [AS. sperewyrt.] (Bot.) A name given to several
species of crowfoot (Ranunculus) which have spear-shaped leaves.

Spear"y (?), a. Having the form of a spear.

Spece (?), n. Species; kind. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Specht (?), n. [See Speight.] (Zoöl.) A woodpecker. [Obs. or prov.
Eng.] Sherwood.

Spe"cial (?), a. [L. specialis, fr. species a particular sort, kind, or
quality: cf. F. spécial. See Species, and cf. Especial.] 1. Of or
pertaining to a species; constituting a species or sort.

    A special is called by the schools a "species".


I. Watts.

2. Particular; peculiar; different from others; extraordinary;
uncommon.

    Our Savior is represented everywhere in Scripture as the special
    patron of the poor and the afficted.


Atterbury.

    To this special evil an improvement of style would apply a special
    redress.


De Quincey.

3. Appropriate; designed for a particular purpose, occasion, or person;
as, a special act of Parliament or of Congress; a special sermon.

4. Limited in range; confined to a definite field of action,
investigation, or discussion; as, a special dictionary of commercial
terms; a special branch of study.

5. Chief in excellence. [Obs.]

    The king hath drawn The special head of all the land together.


Shak.

Special administration (Law), an administration limited to certain
specified effects or acts, or one granted during a particular time or
the existence of a special cause, as during a controversy respecting
the probate of a will, or the right of administration, etc. -- Special
agency, an agency confined to some particular matter. -- Special bail,
Bail above, or Bail to the action (Law), sureties who undertake that,
if the defendant is convicted, he shall satisfy the plaintiff, or
surrender himself into custody. Tomlins. Wharton (Law Dict.). --
Special constable. See under Constable. Bouvier. -- Special damage
(Law), a damage resulting from the act complained of, as a natural, but
not the necessary, consequence of it. -- Special demurrer (Law), a
demurrer for some defect of form in the opposite party pleading, in
which the cause of demurrer is particularly stated. -- Special deposit,
a deposit made of a specific thing to be kept distinct from others. --
Special homology. (Biol.) See under Homology. -- Special injuction
(Law), an injuction granted on special grounds, arising of the
circumstances of the case. Daniell. -- Special issue (Law), an issue
produced upon a special plea. Stephen. -- Special jury (Law), a jury
consisting of persons of some particular calling, station, or
qualification, which is called upon motion of either party when the
cause is supposed to require it; a struck jury. -- Special orders
(Mil.), orders which do not concern, and are not published to, the
whole command, such as those relating to the movement of a particular
corps, a detail, a temporary camp, etc. -- Special partner, a limited
partner; a partner with a limited or restricted responsibility; --
unknown at common law. -- Special partnership, a limited or particular
partnership; -- a term sometimes applied to a partnership in a
particular business, operation, or adventure. -- Special plea in bar
(Law), a plea setting forth particular and new matter, distinguished
from the general issue. Bouvier. -- Special pleader (Law), originally,
a counsel who devoted himself to drawing special counts and pleas; in a
wider sense, a lawyer who draws pleadings. -- Special pleading (Law),
the allegation of special or new matter, as distingiushed from a direct
denial of matter previously alleged on the side. Bouvier. The popular
denomination of the whole science of pleading. Stephen. The phrase is
sometimes popularly applied to the specious, but unsound, argumentation
of one whose aim is victory, and not truth. Burrill. -- Special
property (Law), a qualified or limited ownership possession, as in wild
animals, things found or bailed. -- Special session, an extraordinary
session; a session at an unusual time or for an unusual purpose; as, a
special session of Congress or of a legislature. -- Special statute, or
Special law, an act of the legislature which has reference to a
particular person, place, or interest; -- in distinction from a general
law. -- Special verdict (Law), a special finding of the facts of the
case, leaving to the court the application of the law to them. Wharton
(Law Dict.).

Syn. -- Peculiar; appropriate; specific; dictinctive; particular;
exceptional; singular. See Peculiar.

Spe"cial, n. 1. A particular. [Obs.] Hammond.

2. One appointed for a special service or occasion.

In special, specially; in particular. Chaucer.

Spe"cial*ism (?), n. Devotion to a particular and restricted part or
branch of knowledge, art, or science; as, medical specialism.

Spe"cial*ist (?), n. One who devotes himself to some specialty; as, a
medical specialist, one who devotes himself to diseases of particular
parts of the body, as the eye, the ear, the nerves, etc.

Spe`ci*al"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Specialities (#). [See Special, and
Specialty.] 1. A particular or peculiar case; a particularity. Sir M.
Hale.

2. (Law) See Specialty, 3.

3. The special or peculiar mark or characteristic of a person or thing;
that for which a person is specially distinguished; an object of
special attention; a special occupation or object of attention; a
specialty.

    On these two general heads all other specialities are depedent.


Hooker.

    Strive, while improving your one talent, to enrich your whole
    capital as a man. It is in this way that you escape from the
    wretched narrow-mindedness which is the characteristic of every one
    who cultivates his speciality.


Ld. Lytton.

    We 'll say, instead, the inconsequent creature man, - For that'a
    his speciality.


Mrs. Browning.

    Think of this, sir, . . . remote from the impulses of passion, and
    apart from the specialities -- if I may use that strong remark --
    of prejudice.


Dickens.

4. An attribute or quality peculiar to a species.

Spe`cial*i*za"tion (?), n. 1. The act of specializing, or the state of
being spezialized.

2. (Biol.) The setting apart of a particular organ for the performance
of a particular function. Darwin.

Spe"cial*ize (?), v. t. 1. To mention specially; to particularize.

2. To apply to some specialty or limited object; to assign to a
specific use; as, specialized knowledge.

3. (Biol.) To supply with an organ or organs having a special function
or functions.

Spe"cial*ly, adv. 1. In a special manner; particularly; especially.
Chaucer.

2. For a particular purpose; as, a meeting of the legislature is
specially summoned.

Spe"cial*ty (?), n.; pl. Specialties (#). [F. spécialité. Cf.
Speciality.] 1. Particularity.

    Specialty of rule hath been neglected.


Shak.

2. A particular or peculiar case. [Obs.]

3. (Law) A contract or obligation under seal; a contract by deed; a
writing, under seal, given as security for a debt particularly
specified. Chitty. Bouvier. Wharton (Law Dict.).

    Let specialties be therefore drawn between us.


Shak.

4. That for which a person is distinguished, in which he is specially
versed, or which he makes an object of special attention; a speciality.

    Men of boundless knowledge, like Humbold, must have had once their
    specialty, their pet subject.


C. Kingsley.

||Spe"ci*e (?), abl. of L. species sort, kind. Used in the phrase in
||specie, that is, in sort, in kind, in (its own) form.

    "[The king] expects a return in specie from them" [i. e., kindness
    for kindness].


Dryden.

In specie (Law), in precise or definite form; specifically; according
to the exact terms; of the very thing.

Spe"cie (?), n. [Formed as a singular from species, in sense 5.] Coin;
hard money.

Spe"cies (?), n. sing. & pl. [L., a sight, outward appearance, shape,
form, a particular sort, kind, or quality, a species. See Spice, n.,
and cf. Specie, Special.] 1. Visible or sensible presentation;
appearance; a sensible percept received by the imagination; an image.
[R.] "The species of the letters illuminated with indigo and violet."
Sir I. Newton.

    Wit, . . . the faculty of imagination in the writer, which searches
    over all the memory for the species or ideas of those things which
    it designs to represent.


Dryden.

In the scholastic philosophy, the species was sensible and
intelligible. The sensible species was that in any material, object
which was in fact discerned by the mind through the organ of
perception, or that in any object which rendered it possible that it
should be perceived. The sensible species, as apprehended by the
understanding in any of the relations of thought, was called an
intelligible species. "An apparent diversity between the species
visible and audible is, that the visible doth not mingle in the medium,
but the audible doth." Bacon.

2. (Logic) A group of individuals agreeing in common attributes, and
designated by a common name; a conception subordinated to another
conception, called a genus, or generic conception, from which it
differs in containing or comprehending more attributes, and extending
to fewer individuals. Thus, man is a species, under animal as a genus;
and man, in its turn, may be regarded as a genus with respect to
European, American, or the like, as species.

3. In science, a more or less permanent group of existing things or
beings, associated according to attributes, or properties determined by
scientific observation.

In mineralogy and chemistry, objects which possess the same definite
chemical structure, and are fundamentally the same in crystallization
and physical characters, are classed as belonging to a species. In
zoölogy and botany, a species is an ideal group of individuals which
are believed to have descended from common ancestors, which agree in
essential characteristics, and are capable of indefinitely continued
fertile reproduction through the sexes. A species, as thus defined,
differs from a variety or subspecies only in the greater stability of
its characters and in the absence of individuals intermediate between
the related groups.

4. A sort; a kind; a variety; as, a species of low cunning; a species
of generosity; a species of cloth.

5. Coin, or coined silver, gold, ot other metal, used as a circulating
medium; specie. [Obs.]

    There was, in the splendor of the Roman empire, a less quantity of
    current species in Europe than there is now.


Arbuthnot.

6. A public spectacle or exhibition. [Obs.] Bacon.

7. (Pharmacy) (a) A component part of compound medicine; a simple. (b)
(Med.) An officinal mixture or compound powder of any kind; esp., one
used for making an aromatic tea or tisane; a tea mixture. Quincy.

8. (Civil Law) The form or shape given to materials; fashion or shape;
form; figure. Burill.

Incipient species (Zoöl.), a subspecies, or variety, which is in
process of becoming permanent, and thus changing to a true species,
usually by isolation in localities from which other varieties are
excluded.

Spec"i*fi`a*ble (?), a. Admitting specification; capable of being
specified.

Spe*cif"ic (?), a. [F. spécifique, or NL. cpesificus; L. species a
particular sort or kind + facere to make. Cf. Specify.] 1. Of or
pertaining to a species; characterizing or constituting a species;
possessing the peculiar property or properties of a thing which
constitute its species, and distinguish it from other things; as, the
specific form of an animal or a plant; the specific qualities of a
drug; the specific distinction between virtue and vice.

    Specific difference is that primary attribute which distinguishes
    each species from one another.


I. Watts.

2. Specifying; definite, or making definite; limited; precise;
discriminating; as, a specific statement.

3. (Med.) Exerting a peculiar influence over any part of the body;
preventing or curing disease by a peculiar adaption, and not on general
principles; as, quinine is a specific medicine in cases of malaria.

    In fact, all medicines will be found specific in the perfection of
    the science.


Coleridge.

Specific character (Nat. Hist.), a characteristic or characteristics
distinguishing one species from every other species of the same genus.
-- Specific disease (Med.) (a) A disease which produces a determinate
definite effect upon the blood and tissues or upon some special tissue.
(b) A disease which is itself uniformly produced by a definite and
peculiar poison or organism. -- Specific duty. (Com.) See under Duty.
-- Specific gravity. (Physics) See under Gravity. -- Specific heat
(Physics), the quantity of heat required to raise temperature of a body
one degree, taking as the unit of measure the quantity required to
raise the same weight of water from zero to one degree; thus, the
specific heat of mercury is 0.033, that of water being 1.000. --
Specific inductive capacity (Physics), the effect of a dielectric body
in producing static electric induction as compared with that of some
other body or bodies referred to as a standard. -- Specific legacy
(Law), a bequest of a particular thing, as of a particular animal or
piece of furniture, specified and distinguished from all others.
Wharton. Burrill. -- Specific name (Nat., Hist.), the name which,
appended to the name of the genus, constitutes the distinctive name of
the species; -- originally applied by Linnæus to the essential
character of the species, or the essential difference. The present
specific name he at first called the trivial name. -- Specific
performance (Law), the peformance of a contract or agreement as decreed
by a court of equity.

Spe*cif"ic, n. 1. (Med.) A specific remedy. See Specific, a., 3.

    His parents were weak enough to believe that the royal touch was a
    specific for this malady.


Macaulay.

2. Anything having peculiar adaption to the purpose to which it is
applied. Dr. H. More.

Spe*cif"ic*al (?), a. Specific. Bacon.

Spe*cif"ic*al*ly (?), adv. In a specific manner.

Spe*cif"ic*al*ness, n. The quality of being specific.

Spe*cif"i*cate (?), v. t. [See Specify.] To show, mark, or designate
the species, or the distinguishing particulars of; to specify. [Obs.]
ir M. Hale.

Spec`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Cf. F. spécification, LL. specificatio.] 1.
The act of specifying or determining by a mark or limit; notation of
limits.

    This specification or limitation of the question hinders the
    disputers from wandering away from the precise point of inquiry.


I. Watts.

2. The designation of particulars; particular mention; as, the
specification of a charge against an officer.

3. A written statement containing a minute description or enumeration
of particulars, as of charges against a public officer, the terms of a
contract, the description of an invention, as in a patent; also, a
single article, item, or particular, an allegation of a specific act,
as in a charge of official misconduct.

Spe*cif"ic*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being specific.

Spec"i*fy (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Specified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Specifying (?).] [F. spécifier, or OF. especifier, fr. LL. specificare.
See Species, -fy.] To mention or name, as a particular thing; to
designate in words so as to distinguish from other things; as, to
specify the uses of a plant; to specify articles purchased.

    He has there given us an exact geography of Greece, where the
    countries and the uses of their soils are specified.


Pope.

||Spe*cil"lum (?), n. [L.] (Med.) See Stylet, 2.

Spec"i*men (?), n. [L., fr. specere to look, to behold. See Spy.] A
part, or small portion, of anything, or one of a number of things,
intended to exhibit the kind and quality of the whole, or of what is
not exhibited; a sample; as, a specimen of a man's handwriting; a
specimen of painting; aspecimen of one's art.

Syn. -- Sample; model; pattern. -- Specimen, Sample. A specimen is a
representative of the class of things to which it belongs; as, a
specimen of photography. A sample is a part of the thing itself,
designed to show the quality of the whole; as, a sample of sugar or of
broadcloth. A cabinet of minerals consists of specimens; if a part be
broken off from any one of these, it is a sample of the mineral to
which it belongs. "Several persons have exhibited specimens of this art
before multitudes of beholders." Addison. "I design this but for a
sample of what I hope more fully to discuss." Woodward.

Spe`ci*os"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Speciocities (#). [Cf. LL. speciositas.] 1.
The quality or state of being specious; speciousness.

    Professions built so largely on speciosity, instead of performance.


Carlyle.

2. That which is specious. Dr. H. More.

<! p. 1381 !>

Spe"cious (?), a. [L. speciosusgood-looking, beautiful, specious, fr.
species look, show, appearance; cf. F. spécoeux. See Species.] 1.
Presenting a pleasing appearance; pleasing in form or look; showy.

    Some [serpents] specious and beautiful to the eye.


Bp. Richardson.

    The rest, far greater part, Will deem in outward rites and specious
    forms Religion satisfied.


Milton.

2. Apparently right; superficially fair, just, or correct, but not so
in reality; appearing well at first view; plausible; as, specious
reasoning; a specious argument.

    Misled for a moment by the specious names of religion, liberty, and
    property.


Macaulay.

    In consequence of their greater command of specious expression.


J. Morley.

Syn. -- Plausible; showy; ostensible; colorable; feasible. See
Plausible.

-- Spe"xious*ly (#), adv. -- Spe"cious*ness, n.

Speck (?), n. [Cf. Icel. spik blubber, AS. spic, D. spek, G. speck.]
The blubber of whales or other marine mammals; also, the fat of the
hippopotamus.

Speck falls (Naut.), falls or ropes rove through blocks for hoisting
the blubber and bone of whales on board a whaling vessel.

Speck, n. [OE. spekke, AS. specca; cf. LG. spaak.] 1. A small
discolored place in or on anything, or a small place of a color
different from that of the main substance; a spot; a stain; a blemish;
as, a speck on paper or loth; specks of decay in fruit. "Gray sand,
with black specks." Anson.

2. A very small thing; a particle; a mite; as, specks of dust; he has
not a speck of money.

    Many bright specks bubble up along the blue Egean.


Landor.

3. (Zoöl.) A small etheostomoid fish (Ulocentra stigmæa) common in the
Eastern United States.

Speck, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Specked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Specking.] To
cause the presence of specks upon or in, especially specks regarded as
defects or blemishes; to spot; to speckle; as, paper specked by
impurities in the water used in its manufacture.

    Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold.


Milton.

Spec"kle (?), n. [Dim. of speck; cf. D. spikkel.] A little or spot in
or anything, of a different substance or color from that of the thing
itself.

    An huge great serpent, all with speckles pied.


Spebser.

Spec"kle, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Speckled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Speckling
(?).] To mark with small spots of a different color from that of the
rest of the surface; to variegate with spots of a different color from
the ground or surface.

Spec"kled (?), a. Marked or variegated with small spots of a different
color from that of the rest of the surface.

Speckled Indians (Ethnol.), the Pintos. -- Speckled trout. (Zoöl.) (a)
The common American brook trout. See Trout. (b) The rainbow trout.

Spec"kled-bel`ly (?), n. (Zoöl.) The gadwall. [Local, U.S.]

Spec"kled-bill" (?), n. (Zoöl.) The American white-fronted goose (Anser
albifrons).

Spec"kled*ness, n. The quality of being speckled.

Speck`sion*eer" (?), n. The chief harpooner, who also directs in
cutting up the speck, or blubber; -- so called among whalers.

Speckt (?), n. A woodpecker. See Speight.

Spec"ta*cle (?), n. [F., fr. L. spectaculum, fr. spectare to look at,
to behold, v. intens. fr. specere. See Spy.] 1. Something exhibited to
view; usually, something presented to view as extraordinary, or as
unusual and worthy of special notice; a remarkable or noteworthy sight;
a show; a pageant; a gazingstock.

    O, piteous spectacle? O, bloody times!


Shak.

2. A spy-glass; a looking-glass. [Obs.]

    Poverty a spectacle is, as thinketh me, Through which he may his
    very friends see.


Chaucer.

3. pl. An optical instrument consisting of two lenses set in a light
frame, and worn to assist sight, to obviate some defect in the organs
of vision, or to shield the eyes from bright light.

4. pl. Fig.: An aid to the intellectual sight.

    Shakespeare . . . needed not the spectacles of books to read
    nature.


Dryden.

Syn. -- Show; sight; exhibition; representation; pageant.

Spec"ta*cled (?), a. 1. Furnished with spectacles; wearing spectacles.

    As spectacled she sits in chimney nook.


Keats.

2. (Zoöl.) Having the eyes surrounded by color markings, or patches of
naked skin, resembling spectacles.

Spectacled bear (Zoöl.), a South American bear (Tremarclos ornatus)
which inhabits the high mountains of Chili and Peru. It has a
light-colored ring around each eye. -- Spectacled coot, or Spectacled
duck (Zoöl.), the surf scoter, or surf duck. [Local, U.S.] --
Spectacled eider (Zoöl.) See Eider. -- Spectacled goose (Zoöl.), the
gannet. -- Spectacled snake (Zoöl.), the cobra de capello.

Spec*tac"u*lar (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a shows; of the nature of
a show. "Spectacular sports." G. Hickes.

2. Adapted to excite wonder and admiration by a display of pomp or of
scenic effects; as, a spectacular celebration of some event; a
spectacular play.

3. Pertaining to spectacles, or glasses for the eyes.

Spec"tant (?), a. [L. spectans, p. pr. of spectare to look at.] Looking
forward.

Spec*ta"tion (?), n. [L. spectatio.] Regard; aspect; appearance.
Harvey.

Spec*ta"tor (?), n. [L. spectator: cf. F. spectateur. See Spectacle.]
One who on; one who sees or beholds; a beholder; one who is personally
present at, and sees, any exhibition; as, the spectators at a show.
"Devised and played to take spectators." Shak.

Syn. -- Looker-on; beholder; observer; witness.

Spec`ta*to"ri*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a spectator. Addison.

Spec*ta"tor*ship (?), n. 1. The office or quality of a spectator. [R.]
Addison.

2. The act of beholding. [Obs.] Shak.

{ Spec*ta"tress (?), Spec*ta"trix (?) }, n. [L. spectatrix.] A female
beholder or looker-on. "A spectatress of the whole scene." Jeffrey.

{ Spec"ter, Spec"tre } (?), n. [F. spectre, fr. L. spectrum an
appearance, image, specter, fr. specere to look. See Spy, and cf.
Spectrum.] 1. Something preternaturally visible; an apparition; a
ghost; a phantom.

    The ghosts of traitors from the bridge descend, With bold fanatic
    specters to rejoice.


Dryden.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) The tarsius. (b) A stick insect.

Specter bat (Zoöl.), any phyllostome bat. -- Specter candle (Zoöl.), a
belemnite. -- Specter shrimp (Zoöl.), a skeleton shrimp. See under
Skeleton.

Spec`tion*eer" (?), n. Same as Specsioneer.

Spec"tral (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a specter; ghosty.

    He that feels timid at the spectral form of evil is not the man to
    spread light.


F. W. Robertson.

2. (Opt.) Of or pertaining to the spectrum; made by the spectrum; as,
spectral colors; spectral analysis.

Spectral lemur. (Zoöl.) See Tarsius.

Spec"tral*ly, adv. In the form or manner of a specter.

Spec"tre (?), n. See Specter.

Spec`tro*log"ic*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to spectrology; as,
spectrological studies or experiments. -- Spec`tro*log"ic*al*ly, adv.

Spec*trol"o*gy (?), n. [Spectrum + -logy.] (Chem.Phys.) The science of
spectrum analysis in any or all of its relations and applications.

Spec*trom"e*ter (?), n. [Spectrum + -meter.] (Physics) A spectroscope
fitted for measurements of the luminious spectra observed with it.

Spec`tro*pho*tom"e*ter (?), n. [Spectrum + photometer.] (Opt.) An
instrument for measuring or comparing the intensites of the colors of
the spectrum.

Spec"tro*scope (?), n. [Spectrum + -scope.] (Physics) An optical
instrument for forming and examining spectra (as that of solar light,
or those produced by flames in which different substances are
volatilized), so as to determine, from the position of the spectral
lines, the composition of the substance.

{ Spec`tro*scop"ic (?), Spec`tro*scop"ic*al (?) }, a. Of or pertaining
to a spectroscope, or spectroscopy. -- Spec`tro*scop"ic*al*ly, adv.

Spec*tros"co*pist (? or ?), n. One who investigates by means of a
spectroscope; one skilled in the use of the spectroscope.

Spec*tros"co*py (?), n. The use of the spectroscope; investigations
made with the spectroscope.

Spec"trum (?), n.; pl. Spectra (#). [L. See Specter.] 1. An apparition;
a specter. [Obs.]

2. (Opt.) (a) The several colored and other rays of which light is
composed, separated by the refraction of a prism or other means, and
observed or studied either as spread out on a screen, by direct vision,
by photography, or otherwise. See Illust. of Light, and Spectroscope.
(b) A luminous appearance, or an image seen after the eye has been
exposed to an intense light or a strongly illuminated object. When the
object is colored, the image appears of the complementary color, as a
green image seen after viewing a red wafer lying on white paper. Called
also ocular spectrum.

Absorption spectrum, the spectrum of light which has passed through a
medium capable of absorbing a portion of the rays. It is characterized
by dark spaces, bands, or lines. -- Chemical spectrum, a spectrum of
rays considered solely with reference to their chemical effects, as in
photography. These, in the usual photogrophic methods, have their
maximum influence at and beyond the violet rays, but are not limited to
this region. -- Chromatic spectrum, the visible colored rays of the
solar spectrum, exhibiting the seven principal colors in their order,
and covering the central and larger portion of the space of the whole
spectrum. -- Continous spectrum, a spectrum not broken by bands or
lines, but having the colors shaded into each other continously, as
that from an incandescent solid or liquid, or a gas under high
pressure. -- Diffraction spectrum, a spectrum produced by diffraction,
as by a grating. -- Gaseous spectrum, the spectrum of an incandesoent
gas or vapor, under moderate, or especially under very low, pressure.
It is characterized by bright bands or lines. -- Normal spectrum, a
representation of a spectrum arranged upon conventional plan adopted as
standard, especially a spectrum in which the colors are spaced
proportionally to their wave lengths, as when formed by a diffraction
grating. -- Ocular spectrum. See Spectrum, 2 (b), above. -- Prismatic
spectrum, a spectrum produced by means of a prism. -- Solar spectrum,
the spectrum of solar light, especially as thrown upon a screen in a
darkened room. It is characterized by numerous dark lines called
Fraunhofer lines. -- Spectrum analysis, chemical analysis effected by
comparison of the different relative positions and qualities of the
fixed lines of spectra produced by flames in which different substances
are burned or evaporated, each substance having its own characteristic
system of lines. -- Thermal spectrum, a spectrum of rays considered
solely with reference to their heating effect, especially of those rays
which produce no luminous phenomena.

Spec"u*lar (?), a. [L. specularis (cf., from the same root, specula a
lookout, watchtower): cf. F. spéculaire. See Speculum.] 1. Having the
qualities of a speculum, or mirror; having a smooth, reflecting
surface; as, a specular metal; a specular surface.

2. (Med.) Of or pertaining to a speculum; conducted with the aid of a
speculum; as, a specular examination.

3. Assisting sight, as a lens or the like. [Obs.]

    Thy specular orb Apply to well-dissected kernels; lo! In each
    observe the slender threads Of first-beginning trees.


J. Philips.

4. Affording view. [R.] "Look once more, ere we leave this specular
mount." Milton.

Specular iron. (Min.) See Hematite.

Spec"u*late (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Speculated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Speculating.] [L. speculatus, p. p. of speculari to spy out, observe,
fr. specula a lookout, fr. specere to look. See Spy.] 1. To consider by
turning a subject in the mind, and viewing it in its different aspects
and relations; to meditate; to contemplate; to theorize; as, to
speculate on questions in religion; to speculate on political events.

    It is remarkable that persons who speculate the most boldly often
    conform with the most pefect quietude to the external regulations
    of society.


Hawthorne.

2. (Philos.) To view subjects from certain premises given or assumed,
and infer conclusions respecting them a priori.

3. (Com.) To purchase with the expectation of a contingent advance in
value, and a consequent sale at a profit; -- often, in a somewhat
depreciative sense, of unsound or hazardous transactions; as, to
speculate in coffee, in sugar, or in bank stock.

Spec"u*late, v. t. To consider attentively; as, to speculate the nature
of a thing. [R.] Sir W. Hamilton.

Spec`u*la"tion (?), n. [L. speculatio a spying out, observation: cf. F.
spéculation.] 1. The act of speculating. Specifically: --

(a) Examination by the eye; view. [Obs.]

(b) Mental view of anything in its various aspects and relations;
contemplation; intellectual examination.

    Thenceforth to speculations high or deep I turned my thoughts.


Milton.

(c) (Philos.) The act or process of reasoning a priori from premises
given or assumed.

(d) (Com.) The act or practice of buying land, goods, shares, etc., in
expectation of selling at a higher price, or of selling with the
expectation of repurchasing at a lower price; a trading on anticipated
fluctuations in price, as distinguished from trading in which the
profit expected is the difference between the retail and wholesale
prices, or the difference of price in different markets.

    Sudden fortunes, indeed, are sometimes made in such places, by what
    is called the trade of speculation.


A. Smith.

    Speculation, while confined within moderate limits, is the agent
    for equalizing supply and demand, and rendering the fluctuations of
    price less sudden and abrupt than they would otherwise be.


F. A. Walker.

(e) Any business venture in involving unusual risks, with a chance for
large profits.

2. A conclusion to which the mind comes by speculating; mere theory;
view; notion; conjecture.

    From him Socrates derived the principles of morality, and most part
    of his natural speculations.


Sir W. temple.

    To his speculations on these subjects he gave the lofty name of the
    "Oracles of Reason."


Macaulay.

3. Power of sight. [Obs.]

    Thou hast no speculation in those eyes.


Shak.

4. A game at cards in which the players buy from one another trumps or
whole hands, upon a chance of getting the highest trump dealt, which
entitles the holder to the pool of stakes.

Spec"u*la*tist (?), n. One who speculates, or forms theories; a
speculator; a theorist.

    The very ingenious speculatist, Mr. Hume.


V. Knox.

Spec"u*la*tive (?), a. [Cf. F. spéculatif, L. speculativus.] 1. Given
to speculation; contemplative.

    The mind of man being by nature speculative.


Hooker.

2. Involving, or formed by, speculation; ideal; theoretical; not
established by demonstration. Cudworth.

3. Of or pertaining to vision; also, prying; inquisitive; curious. [R.]
Bacon.

4. Of or pertaining to speculation in land, goods, shares, etc.; as, a
speculative dealer or enterprise.

    The speculative merchant exercises no one regular, established, or
    well-known branch of business.


A. Smith.

-- Spec"u*la*tive*ly, adv. -- Spec"u*la*tive*ness, n.

Spec"u*la`tor (?), n. [L., a spy, explorer, investigator: cf. F.
spéculateur.] One who speculates. Specifically: (a) An observer; a
contemplator; hence, a spy; a watcher. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

(b) One who forms theories; a theorist.

    A speculator who had dared to affirm that the human soul is by
    nature mortal.


Macaulay.

(c) (Com.) One who engages in speculation; one who buys and sells
goods, land, etc., with the expectation of deriving profit from
fluctuations in price.

<! p. 1382 !>

Spec`u*la*to"ri*al (?), a. Speculatory; speculative. [Obs.]

Spec"u*la*to*ry (?), a. [L. speculatorius belonging to spies or
scouts.] 1. Intended or adapted for viewing or espying; having
oversight. T. Warton.

2. Exercising speculation; speculative. T. Carew.

Spec"u*list (?), n. One who observes or considers; an observer. [R.]
Goldsmith.

Spec"u*lum (?), n.; pl. L. Specula (#), E. Speculum (#). [L., fr.
specere to look, behold. See Spy.] 1. A mirror, or looking-glass;
especially, a metal mirror, as in Greek and Roman archæology.

2. A reflector of polished metal, especially one used in reflecting
telescopes. See Speculum metal, below.

3. (Surg.) An instrument for dilating certain passages of the body, and
throwing light within them, thus facilitating examination or surgical
operations.

4. (Zoöl.) A bright and lustrous patch of color found on the wings of
ducks and some other birds. It is usually situated on the distal
portions of the secondary quills, and is much more brilliant in the
adult male than in the female.

Speculum metal, a hard, brittle alloy used for making the reflectors of
telescopes and other instruments, usually consisting of copper and tin
in various proportions, one of the best being that in which there are
126.4 parts of copper to 58.9 parts of tin, with sometimes a small
proportion of arsenic, antimony, or zinc added to improve the
whiteness.

Sped (?), imp. & p. p. of Speed.

Speece (?), n. Species; sort. [Obs.]

Speech (?), n. [OE. speche, AS. sp&?;c, spr&?;, fr. specan, sprecan, to
speak; akin to D. spraak speech, OHG. sprhha, G. sprache, Sw. spr&?;k,
Dan. sprog. See Speak.] 1. The faculty of uttering articulate sounds or
words; the faculty of expressing thoughts by words or articulate
sounds; the power of speaking.

    There is none comparable to the variety of instructive expressions
    by speech, wherewith man alone is endowed for the communication of
    his thoughts.


Holder.

2. he act of speaking; that which is spoken; words, as expressing
ideas; language; conversation.

Speech is voice modulated by the throat, tongue, lips, etc., the
modulation being accomplished by changing the form of the cavity of the
mouth and nose through the action of muscles which move their walls.

    O goode God! how gentle and how kind Ye seemed by your speech and
    your visage The day that maked was our marriage.


Chaucer.

    The acts of God . . . to human ears Can nort without process of
    speech be told.


Milton.

3. A particular language, as distinct from others; a tongue; a dialect.

    People of a strange speech and of an hard language.


Ezek. iii. 6.

4. Talk; mention; common saying.

    The duke . . . did of me demand What was the speech among the
    Londoners Concerning the French journey.


Shak.

5. formal discourse in public; oration; harangue.

    The constant design of these orators, in all their speeches, was to
    drive some one particular point.


Swift.

6. ny declaration of thoughts.

    I. with leave of speech implored, . . . replied.


Milton.

Syn. Harangue; language; address; oration. See Harangue, and Language.

Speech, v. i. & t. To make a speech; to harangue. [R.]

Speech"ful (?), a. Full of speech or words; voluble; loquacious. [R.]

Speech`i*fi*ca"tion (?), n.[See Spechify.] The act of speechifying.
[Used humorously or in contempt.]

Speech"i*fi`er (?), n. One who makes a speech or speeches; an orator; a
declaimer. [Used humorously or in contempt.] G. Eliot.

Speech"i*fy (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Speechified (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Speechifying (?).] [Speech + -fy.] To make a speech; to harangue. [Used
derisively or humorously.]

Speech"i*fy`ing, n. The act of making a speech or speeches. [Used
derisively or humorously.]

    The dinner and speechifying . . . at the opening of the annual
    season for the buckhounds.


M. Arnold.

Speech"ing, n. The act of making a speech. [R.]

Speech"less, a. 1. Destitute or deprived of the faculty of speech.

2. Not speaking for a time; dumb; mute; silent.

    Speechless with wonder, and half dead with fear.


Addison.

-- Speech"less*ly, adv. -- Speech"less*ness, n.

Speech"mak`er (?), n. One who makes speeches; one accustomed to speak
in a public assembly.

Speed (?), n. [AS. sp&?;d success, swiftness, from sp&?;wan to succeed;
akin to D. spoedd, OHG. spuot success, spuot to succees, Skr. sph to
increase, grow fat. &radic;170b.] 1. Prosperity in an undertaking;
favorable issue; success. "For common speed." Chaucer.

    O Lord God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed
    this day.


Gen. xxiv. 12.

2. The act or state of moving swiftly; swiftness; velocity; rapidly;
rate of motion; dispatch; as, the speed a horse or a vessel.

    Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails.


Milton.

In kinematics, speedis sometimes used to denote the amount of velocity
without regard to direction of motion, while velocity is not regarded
as known unless both the direction and the amount are known.

3. One who, or that which, causes or promotes speed or success. [Obs.]
"Hercules be thy speed!" Shak.

God speed, Good speed; prosperity. See Godspeed. -- Speed gauge, Speed
indicator, &and; Speed recorder (Mach.), devices for indicating or
recording the rate of a body's motion, as the number of revolutions of
a shaft in a given time. -- Speed lathe (Mach.), a power lathe with a
rapidly revolving spindle, for turning small objects, for polishing,
etc.; a hand lathe. -- Speed pulley, a cone pulley with steps.

Syn. -- Haste; swiftness; celerity; quickness; dispatch; expedition;
hurry; acceleration. See Haste.

Speed (spd), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sped (spd), Speeded; p. pr. & vb. n.
Speeding.] [AS. spdan, fr. spd, n.; akin to D. spoeden, G. sich sputen.
See Speed, n.] 1. To go; to fare. [Obs.]

    To warn him now he is too farre sped.


Remedy of Love.

2. To experience in going; to have any condition, good or ill; to fare.
Shak.

    Ships heretofore in seas like fishes sped; The mightiest still upon
    the smallest fed.


Waller.

3. To fare well; to have success; to prosper.

    Save London, and send true lawyers their meed! For whoso wants
    money with them shall not speed!


Lydgate.

    I told ye then he should prevail, and speed On his bad errand.


Milton.

4. To make haste; to move with celerity.

    I have speeded hither with the very extremest inch of possibility.


Shak.

5. To be expedient. [Obs.] Wyclif (2 Cor. xii. 1.)

Speed, v. t. 1. To cause to be successful, or to prosper; hence, to
aid; to favor. "Fortune speed us!" Shak.

    With rising gales that speed their happy flight.


Dryden.

2. To cause to make haste; to dispatch with celerity; to drive at full
speed; hence, to hasten; to hurry.

    He sped him thence home to his habitation.


Fairfax.

3. To hasten to a conclusion; to expedite.

    Judicial acts . . . are sped in open court at the instance of one
    or both of the parties.


Ayliffe.

4. To hurry to destruction; to put an end to; to ruin; to undo. "Sped
with spavins." Shak.

    A dire dilemma! either way I 'm sped. If foes, they write, if
    friends, they read, me dead.


Pope.

5. To wish success or god fortune to, in any undertaking, especially in
setting out upon a journey.

    Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest.


Pope.

God speed you, them, etc., may God speed you; or, may you have good
speed.

Syn. -- To dispatch; hasten; expedite; accelerate; hurry.

Speed"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, speeds.

2. (Spinning) A machine for drawing and twisting slivers to form
rovings.

Speed"ful (?), a. Full of speed (in any sense). [Obs.]

Speed"ful*ly, adv. In a speedful manner. [Obs.]

Speed"i*ly (?), adv. In a speedy manner.

Speed"i*ness, n. The quality or state of being speedy.

Speed"less, a. Being without speed.

Speed"well (?), n. (Bot.) Any plant of the genus Veronica, mostly low
herbs with pale blue corollas, which quickly fall off.

Speed"y (-), a. [Compar. Speedier (?); superl. Speediest.] [AS. spdyg.]
Not dilatory or slow; quick; swift; nimble; hasty; rapid in motion or
performance; as, a speedy flight; on speedy foot.

    I will wish her speedy strength.


Shak.

    Darts, which not the good could shun, The speedy ould outfly.


Dryden.

Speer (?), n. A sphere. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Speer, v. t. To ask. [Scot.] See Spere.

Speet (?), v. t. [Cf. D. speten. See Spit an iron prong.] To stab.
[Obs.] Gammer Gurton's Needle.

Speight (?), n. [G. specht, probably akin to L. picus: cf. D. specht.
&radic;169. See Pie a magpie.] (Zoöl.) A woodpecker; -- called also
specht, spekt, spight. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

Speir (?), v. i. To ask. See Spere. Sir W. Scott.

Speis`ko"balt (?), n. [G.] Smaltite.

Speiss (?), n. [Cf. G. speise food, mixed metal for bells, etc.]
(Metal.) A regulus consisting essentially of nickel, obtained as a
residue in fusing cobalt and nickel ores with silica and sodium
carbonate to make smalt.

Spek"boom (?), n. [D., lit. fat tree.] (Bot.) The purslane tree of
South Africa, -- said to be the favorite food of elephants. Balfour
(Cyc. of India).

Speke (?), v. i. & t. To speak. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Speke"house` (?), n. The parlor or reception room of a convent. [Obs.]

Spel"ding (?), n. [Scot. speld to spread out, spelder to split. spread
open; cf. G. spalten split.] A haddock or other small fish split open
and dried in the sun; -- called also speldron. [Scot.]

Spel"i*cans (?), n. pl. See Spilikin.

Spelk (?), n. [AS. spelc, spilc, a little rod by which a thing is kept
straight, a splint for binding up broken bones, akin to Icel. spelkur,
pl., a splint. Cf. Spell a splinter.] A small stick or rod used as a
spike in thatching; a splinter. [Prov. Eng.] Grose.

Spell (?), n. [OE. speld, AS. speld a spill to light a candle with;
akin to D. speld a pin, OD. spelle, G. spalten to split, OHG. spaltan,
MHG. spelte a splinter, Icel. spjald a square tablet, Goth. spilda a
writing tablet. Cf. Spillsplinter, roll of paper, Spell to tell the
letters of.] A spelk, or splinter. [Obs.] Holland.

Spell, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spelled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spelling.] [AS.
spelian to supply another's place.] To supply the place of for a time;
to take the turn of, at work; to relieve; as, to spell the helmsman.

Spell, n. 1. The relief of one person by another in any piece of work
or watching; also, a turn at work which is carried on by one person or
gang relieving another; as, a spell at the pumps; a spell at the
masthead.

    A spell at the wheel is called a trick.


Ham. Nav. Encyc.

2. The time during which one person or gang works until relieved;
hence, any relatively short period of time, whether a few hours, days,
or weeks.

    Nothing new has happened in this quarter, except the setting in of
    a severe spell of cold weather.


Washington.

3. One of two or more persons or gangs who work by spells. [R.]

    Their toil is so extreme that they can not endure it above four
    hours in a day, but are succeeded by spells.


Garew.

4. A gratuitous helping forward of another's work; as, a logging spell.
[Local, U.S.]

Spell (?), n.[AS. spell a saying, tale, speech; akin to OS. & OHG.
spel, Icel. spjall,Goth. spill. Cf. Gospel, Spell to tell the letters
of.] 1. A story; a tale. [Obs.] "Hearken to my spell." Chaucer.

2. A stanza, verse, or phrase supposed to be endowed with magical
power; an incantation; hence, any charm.

    Start not; her actions shall be holy as You hear my spell is
    lawful.


Shak.

Spell, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spelled (&?;) or Spelt (&?;); p. pr. & vb.
n. Spelling.] [OE. spellen, spellien, tell, relate, AS. spellian, fr.
spell a saying, tale; akin to MHG. spellen to relate, Goth. spill&?;n.e
Spell a tale. In sense 4 and those following, OE. spellen, perhaps
originally a different word, and from or influenced by spell a
splinter, from the use of a piece of wood to point to the letters in
schools: cf. D. spellen to spell. Cf. Spell splinter.] 1. To tell; to
relate; to teach. [Obs.]

    Might I that legend find, By fairies spelt in mystic rhymes.


T. Warton.

2. To put under the influence of a spell; to affect by a spell; to
bewitch; to fascinate; to charm. "Spelled with words of power." Dryden.

    He was much spelled with Eleanor Talbot.


Sir G. Buck.

3. To constitute; to measure. [Obs.]

    The Saxon heptarchy, when seven kings put together did spell but
    one in effect.


Fuller.

4. To tell or name in their proper order letters of, as a word; to
write or print in order the letters of, esp. the proper letters; to
form, as words, by correct orthography.

    The word "satire" ought to be spelled with i, and not with y.


Dryden.

5. To discover by characters or marks; to read with difficulty; --
usually with out; as, to spell out the sense of an author; to spell out
a verse in the Bible.

    To spell out a God in the works of creation.


South.

    To sit spelling and observing divine justice upon every accident.


Milton.

Spell, v. i. 1. To form words with letters, esp. with the proper
letters, either orally or in writing.

    When what small knowledge was, in them did dwell, And he a god, who
    could but read or spell.


Dryden.

2. To study by noting characters; to gain knowledge or learn the
meaning of anything, by study. [Obs.]

    Where I may sit and rightly spell Of every star that heaven doth
    shew, And every herb that sips the dew.


Milton.

Spell"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being spelt. Carlyle.

Spell"bound` (?), a. Bound by, or as by, a spell.

Spell"er (?), n. 1. One who spells.

2. A spelling book. [U. S.]

Spell"ful (?), a. Abounding in spells, or charms.

    Here, while his eyes the learned leaves peruse, Each spellful
    mystery explained he views.


Hoole.

Spell"ing, n. The act of one who spells; formation of words by letters;
orthography.

Spell"ing, a. Of or pertaining to spelling.

Spelling bee, a spelling match. [U.S.] - - Spelling book, a book with
exercises for teaching children to spell; a speller. -- Spelling match,
a contest of skill in spelling words, between two or more persons.

Spell"ken (?), n. A theater. [Slang] Byron.

Spell"work` (?), n. Power or effect of magic; that which is wrought by
magic; enchantment.

    Like those Peri isles of light That hang by spellwork in the air.


Moore.

Spelt (?), imp. & p. p. of Spell. Spelled.

Spelt, n. [AS. spelt, fr. L. spelta.] (Bot.) A species of grain
(Triticum Spelta) much cultivated for food in Germany and Switzerland;
-- called also German wheat.

Spelt, n. [See Spalt.] (Metal.) Spelter. [Colloq.]

Spelt, v. t. & i. [See Spell a splinter.] To split; to break; to spalt.
[Obs.] Mortimer.

Spel"ter (?), n. [Cf. LG. spialter, G. & D. spiauter. Cf. Pewter.]
(Metal.) Zinc; -- especially so called in commerce and arts.

Spe*lunc" (?), n. [L. spelunca cave.] A cavern; a cave. [Obs.] Piers
Plowman.

Spence (?), n. [OF. despense, F. dépense, buffet, buttery, fr. OF.
despendre to spend, distribute, L. dispendere, dispensum. See Dispense,
Spend.] 1. A place where provisions are kept; a buttery; a larder; a
pantry.

    In . . . his spence, or "pantry" were hung the carcasses of a sheep
    or ewe, and two cows lately slaughtered.


Sir W. Scott.

    Bluff Harry broke into the spence, And turned the cowls adrift.


Tennyson.

2. The inner apartment of a country house; also, the place where the
family sit and eat. [Scot.] Jamieson.

Spen"cer (?), n. [OF. despensier. See Spence, and cf. Dispenser.] One
who has the care of the spence, or buttery. [Obs.] Promptorium
Parvulorum.

Spen"cer, n. [From the third Earl Spencer, who first wore it, or
brought it into fashion.] A short jacket worn by men and by women. Ld.
Lutton.

Spen"cer, n. (Naut.) A fore- and-aft sail, abaft the foremast or the
mainmast, hoisted upon a small supplementary mast and set with a gaff
and no boom; a trysail carried at the foremast or mainmast; -- named
after its inventor, Knight Spencer, of England [1802].

Spencer mast, a small mast just abaft the foremast or mainmast, for
hoisting the spencer. R. H. Dana, Jr.

Spend (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spent (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spending.]
[AS. spendan (in comp.), fr. L. expendere or dispendere to weigh out,
to expend, dispense. See Pendant, and cf. Dispend, Expend, Spence,
Spencer.] 1. To weigh or lay out; to dispose of; to part with; as, to
spend money for clothing.

    Spend thou that in the town.


Shak.

    Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread?


Isa. lv. 2.

<! p. 1383 !>

2. To bestow; to employ; -- often with on or upon.

    I . . . am never loath To spend my judgment.


Herbert.

3. To consume; to waste; to squander; to exhaust; as, to spend an
estate in gaming or other vices.

4. To pass, as time; to suffer to pass away; as, to spend a day idly;
to spend winter abroad.

    We spend our years as a tale that is told.


Ps. xc. 9.

5. To exhaust of force or strength; to waste; to wear away; as, the
violence of the waves was spent.

    Their bodies spent with long labor and thirst.


Knolles.

Spend (?), v. i. 1. To expend money or any other possession; to
consume, use, waste, or part with, anything; as, he who gets easily
spends freely.

    He spends as a person who knows that he must come to a reckoning.


South.

2. To waste or wear away; to be consumed; to lose force or strength; to
vanish; as, energy spends in the using of it.

    The sound spendeth and is dissipated in the open air.


Bacon.

3. To be diffused; to spread.

    The vines that they use for wine are so often cut, that their sap
    spendeth into the grapes.


Bacon.

4. (Mining) To break ground; to continue working.

Spen"der (?), n. One who spends; esp., one who spends lavishly; a
prodigal; a spendthrift.

Spend"ing, n. The act of expending; expenditure.

Spending money, money set apart for extra (not necessary) personal
expenses; pocket money. [Colloq.]

Spend"thrift` (?), n. One who spends money profusely or improvidently;
a prodigal; one who lavishes or wastes his estate. Also used
figuratively.

    A woman who was a generous spendthrift of life.


Mrs. R. H. Davis.

Spend"thrift, a. Prodigal; extravagant; wasteful.

Spend"thrift`y (?), a. Spendthrift; prodigal. [R.]

Spen*se"ri*an (?), a. Of or pertaining to the English poet Spenser; --
specifically applied to the stanza used in his poem "The Faërie
Queene."

Spent (spnt), a. 1. Exhausted; worn out; having lost energy or motive
force.

    Now thou seest me Spent, overpowered, despairing of success.


Addison.

    Heaps of spent arrows fall and strew the ground.


Dryden.

2. (Zoöl.) Exhausted of spawn or sperm; -- said especially of fishes.

Spent ball, a ball shot from a firearm, which reaches an object without
having sufficient force to penetrate it.

{ Sper (?), Sperre }, v. t. [See Spar bar.] To shut in; to support; to
inclose; to fasten. [Obs.] "To sperre the gate." Spenser.

Spe"ra*ble (?), a. [L. spearabilis, fr. sperare to hope.] Within the
range of hpe; proper to be hoped for. [Obs.] Bacon.

Sper"a*ble (?), n. See Sperable.

Sper"age (?), n. Asperagus. [Obs.] Sylvester.

Spe"rate (?), a. [L. speratus, p. p. of sperare to hope.] Hoped for, or
to be hoped for. [R.] Bouvier.

Spere (?), v. i. [AS. spyrian to inquire, properly, to follow the
track; akin to D. speuren, G. spüren, Icel. spyrja. &radic;171. See
Spoor.] To search; to pry; to ask; to inquire. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]
[Written also speer, speir.] Jamieson.

Spere, n. [See Sphere.] A sphere. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Sperge (?), n. (Distilling) A charge of wash for the still. Knight.

Sper"ling (?), n. [See Sparling.] (Zoöl.) (a) A smelt; a sparling.
[Prov. Eng.] (b) A young herring. [Local, U.S.]

Sperm (?), n.[F. sperme, L. sperma, Gr. &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;, from
&?;&?;&?;&?; to sow. Cf. Spore.] (Physiol.) The male fecundating fluid;
semen. See Semen.

Sperm cell (Physiol.), one of the cells from which the spermatozoids
are developed. -- Sperm morula. (Biol.) Same as Spermosphere.

Sperm, n.[Contr. fr. spermaceti.] Spermaceti.

Sperm oil, a fatty oil found as a liquid, with spermaceti, in the head
cavities of the sperm whale. -- Sperm whale. (Zoöl.) See in the
Vocabulary.

Sper`ma*ce"ti (?), n. [L. sperma sperm + cetus,gen. ceti, any large sea
animal, a whale, Gr. &?;&?;&?;. See Sperm, Cetaceous.] A white waxy
substance obtained from cavities in the head of the sperm whale, and
used making candles, oilments, cosmetics, etc. It consists essentially
of ethereal salts of palmitic acid with ethal and other hydrocarbon
bases. The substance of spermaceti after the removal of certain
impurities is sometimes called cetin.

Spermaceti whale (Zoöl.), the sperm whale.

Sper"mal*ist (?), n. (Biol.) See Spermist.

Sper"ma*phore (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; sperm + &?;&?;&?;&?; to bear.]
(Bot.) That part of the ovary from which the ovules arise; the
placenta.

Sper"ma*ry (?), n. (Anat.) An organ in which spermatozoa are developed;
a sperm gland; a testicle.

||Sper`ma*the"ca (?), n.; pl. Spermathecæ (#). [NL., from Gr.
||&?;&?;&?;&?; seed + &?;&?;&?;&?; case, or receptacle.] (Zoöl.) A
||small sac connected with the female reproductive organs of insects
||and many other invertebrates, serving to receive and retain the
||spermatozoa.

Sper*mat"ic (?), a. [L. spermaticus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;: cf. F.
spermatique. See Sperm.] (Physiol.) Of or pertaining to semen; as, the
spermatic fluid, the spermatic vessels, etc.

Spermatic cord (Anat.), the cord which suspends the testicle within the
scrotum. It is made up of a connective tissue sheath inclosing the
spermatic duct and accompanying vessels and nerves.

Sper"mat"ic*al (?), a. Spermatic.

Sper"ma*tin (?), n. (Physiol. Chem.) A substance allied to alkali
albumin and to mucin, present in semen, to which it is said to impart
the mucilaginous character.

Sper"ma*tism (?), n. (Physiol.) The emission of sperm, or semen.

||Sper*ma"ti*um (?), n.; pl. Spermatia (#). [NL.] (Bot.) One of the
||motionless spermatozoids in the conceptacles of certain fungi. J. H.
||Balfour.

Sper"ma*tize (?), v. i. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;. See Sperm.] To yield seed; to
emit seed, or sperm. [Obs.] Sir T. Browne.

{ Sper"ma*to- (?), Sper"mo- (?) }. Combining forms from Gr. spe`rma,
-atos, seed, sperm, semen (of plants or animals); as, spermatoblast,
spermoblast.

Sper"ma*to*blast (?), n. Same as Spermoblast.

Sper"ma*to*cyte (?), n. [Spermato-  + Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a hollow
vessel.] (Physiol.) Same as Spermoblast.

Sper`ma*to*gem"ma (?), n. [NL. See Spermato-, and Gemma.] (Physiol.)
Same as Spermosphere.

Sper`ma*to*gen"e*sis (?), n. [Spermato- + genesis.] (Biol.) The
development of the spermatozoids.

Sper`ma*to*ge*net"ic (?), a. (Physiol.) Relating to, or connected with,
spermatogenesis; as, spermatogenetic function.

Sper`ma*tog"e*nous (?), a. [Spermato-  + -genous.] (Physiol.) Sperm-
producing.

||Sper`ma*to*go"ni*um (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;,
||sperm + &?;&?;&?; offspring.] (Physiol.) A primitive seminal cell,
||occuring in masses in the seminal tubules. It divides into a mass
||(spermosphere) of small cells (spermoblast), which in turn give rise
||to spermatozoids.

Sper"ma*toid (?), a. [Spermato- + -oid.] (Physiol.) Spermlike;
resembling sperm, or semen.

||Sper`ma*to"ön (?), n.; pl. Spermatoa (#). [NL., fr. Gr. spe`rma,
||-atos, seed + &?;&?;&?; an egg.] (Anat.) A spermoblast. --
||Sper`ma*to"al (#), a. Owen.

Sper"ma*to*phore (?), n. [Spermato-  + Gr. &?;&?;&?; to bear.] 1.
(Physiol.) Same as Spermospore.

2. (Zoöl.) A capsule or pocket inclosing a number of spermatozoa. They
are present in many annelids, brachiopods, mollusks, and crustaceans.
In cephalopods the structure of the capsule is very complex.

Sper`ma*toph"o*rous (?), a. (Physiol.) Producing seed, or sperm;
seminiferous; as, the so-called spermatophorous cells.

{Sper`ma*tor*rhe"a, Sper`ma*tor*rhœ"a, (&?;) }, n. [NL., fr. Gr.
spe`rma, - atos, seed + &?;&?;&?; to flow.] (Med.) Abnormally frequent
involuntary emission of the semen without copulation.

Sper"ma*to*spore (?), n. Same as Spermospore.

Sper`ma*to*zo"id (?), n. [Spermatozoön + Gr. &?;&?;&?; form.] (Biol.)
The male germ cell in animals and plants, the essential element in
fertilization; a microscopic animalcule-like particle, usually provided
with one or more cilia by which it is capable of active motion. In
animals, the familiar type is that of a small, more or less ovoid head,
with a delicate threadlike cilium, or tail. Called also spermatozoön.
In plants the more usual term is antherozoid.

Sper`ma*to*zo"oid (?) n. (Biol.) A spermatozoid.

||Sper`ma*to*zo"ön (?), n.; pl. Spermatozoa (#). [NL., fr. Gr.
||&?;&?;&?;, sperm + &?;&?;&?; an animal.] (Biol.) Same as
||Spermatozoid.

Sper"mic (?), a. Of or pertaining to sperm, or semen.

||Sper*mid"i*um (?), n.; pl. Spermidia (#). [Nl., fr. Gr. spe`rma
||seed.] (Bot.) An achenium.

Sperm"ist (?), n. (Biol.) A believer in the doctrine, formerly current,
of encasement in the male (see Encasement), in which the seminal
thread, or spermatozoid, was considered as the real animal germ, the
head being the true animal head and the tail the body.

Sper"mo*blast (?), n. [Spermo- + -blast.] (Physiol.) One of the cells
formed by the division of the spermospore, each of which is destined to
become a spermatozoid; a spermatocyte; a spermatoblast.

||Sper`mo*coc"cus (?), n. [NL. See Spermo-, and Coccus.] (Physiol.) The
||nucleus of the sperm cell.

Sper"mo*derm (?), n. [Spermo- + derm: cf. F. spermoderme.] (Bot.) The
covering of a seed; -- sometimes limited to the outer coat or testa.
Lindley.

||Sper`mo*go"ni*um (?), n. [NL.; spermo- + Gr. &?;&?;&?; offspring.]
||(Bot.) A conceptacle of certain lichens, which contains spermatia.

Sper*mol"o*gist (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; picking up seeds; spe`rma
sperm, seed + &?;&?;&?;&?; to gather.] One who treats of, or collects,
seeds. Bailey.

Sper"mo*phile (?), n. [Gr. spe`rma a seed + fi`los loving, fond.]
(Zoöl.) Any ground squirrel of the genus Spermophilus; a gopher. See
Illust. under Gopher.

Sper"mo*phore (?), n. (Zoöl.) A spermatophore.

||Sper*moph"y*ta (?), n. pl. [Nl., from Gr. spe`rma a seed + fyto`n a
||plant.] Plants which produce seed; phænogamia. These plants
||constitute the highest grand division of the vegetable kingdom.

Sper"mo*phyte (?), n. (Bot.) Any plant which produces true seeds; -- a
term recently proposed to replace phænogam.

Sper`mo*phyt"ic (?), a. (Bot.) Capable of producing seeds; phænogamic.

||Sper`mo*plas"ma (?), n. [NL. See Spermo-, and Plasma.] (Physiol.) The
||protoplasm of the sperm cell. Haeckel.

Sper"mo*sphere (?), n. [Spermo- + sphere.] (Physiol.) A mass or ball of
cells formed by the repeated division of a male germinal cell
(spermospore), each constituent cell (spermoblast) of which is
converted into a spermatozoid; a spermatogemma.

Sper"mo*spore (?), n. [Spermo- + spore.] (Physiol.) The male germinal
or seminal cell, from the breaking up of which the spermoblasts are
formed and ultimately the spermatozoids; a spermatospore. Balfour.

Sper"mule (?), n. [Dim. fr. sperm.] (Physiol.) A sperm cell. Haeckel.

Sperm" whale` (?). (Zoöl.) A very large toothed whale (Physeter
macrocephalus), having a head of enormous size. The upper jaw is
destitute of teeth. In the upper part of the head, above the skull,
there is a large cavity, or case, filled with oil and spermaceti. This
whale sometimes grows to the length of more than eighty feet. It is
found in the warmer parts of all the oceans. Called also cachalot, and
spermaceti whale.

Pygmy sperm whale (Zoöl.), a small whale (Kogia breviceps), seldom
twenty feet long, native of tropical seas, but occasionally found on
the American coast. Called also snub-nosed cachalot. -- Sperm-whale
porpoise (Zoöl.), a toothed cetacean (Hyperoödon bidens), found on both
sides of the Atlantic and valued for its oil. The adult becomes about
twenty-five feet long, and its head is very large and thick. Called
also bottle-nosed whale.

Sper"ry*lite (?), n.[Named after F. L. Sperry, who discovered it.]
(Min.) An arsenide of platinum occuring in grains and minute isometric
crystals of tin-white color. It is found near Sudbury, Ontario Canada,
and is the only known compound of platinum occuring in nature.

Sperse (?), v. t. To disperse. [Obs.] Spenser.

Spes"sart*ite (?), n.[From Spessart, in Germany.] (Min.) A manganesian
variety of garnet.

Spet (?), v. t. [AS. sp&?;tan. See Spit.] To spit; to throw out. [Obs.]

Spet, n. Spittle. [Obs.]

Spetch"es (?), n. pl. Parings and refuse of hides, skins, etc., from
which glue is made.

Spew (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spewed (?); p. pr.& vb. n. Spewing.] [OE.
spewen, speowen, AS. spwan;n to D. spuwen to spit. OS & OHG. spwan, G.
speien, Icel. sp&?;ja to spew, Sw. spy, Dan. spye, Goth. spiewan, th.
spjauti, L. spuere to split, Gr. &?;&?;&?;, Skr. shtiv, shthv. Cf.
Pyke, Spit.] [Written also spue.] 1. To eject from the stomach; to
vomit.

2. To cast forth with abhorrence or disgust; to eject.

    Because thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will spew
    thee out of my mouth.


Rev. ii. 16.

Spew, v. i. 1. To vomit. Chaucer.

2. To eject seed, as wet land swollen with frost.

Spew, n. That which is vomited; vomit.

Spew"er (?), n. One who spews.

Spew"i*ness (?), n. The state of being spewy.

Spew"y (?), a. Wet; soggy; inclined to spew.

Sphac"el (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;: cf. F. sphacèle.] (Med.) Gangrene.

Sphac"e*late (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sphacelated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sphacelating.] [NL. sphacelare, sphacelatum, mortify: cf. F. sphacéler.
See Sphacelus.] (Med.) To die, decay, or become gangrenous, as flesh or
bone; to mortify.

Sphac"e*late, v. t. (Med.) To affect with gangrene.

{ Sphac"e*late (?), Sphac"e*la`ted (?), } a. (Med.) Affected with
gangrene; mortified.

<! p. 1384 !>

Sphac`e*la"tion (?), n. (Med.) The process of becoming or making
gangrenous; mortification.

||Sphac"e*lus (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;.] (Med.) Gangrenous
||part; gangrene; slough.

||Sphæ*ren"chy*ma (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; sphere + -enchyma as
||in parenchima.] (Bot.) Vegetable tissue composed of thin-walled
||rounded cells, -- a modification of parenchyma.

||Sphæ*rid"i*um (?), n.; pl. Sphæridia (#). [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; a
||sphere.] (Zoöl.) A peculiar sense organ found upon the exterior of
||most kinds of sea urchins, and consisting of an oval or sherical head
||surmounting a short pedicel. It is generally supposed to be an
||olfactory organ.

Sphæ"ro*spore (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; sphere + E. spore.] (Bot.) One
of the nonsexual spores found in red algæ; a tetraspore.

Sphær"u*lite (?), n. (Min.) Same as Spherulite.

Sphag*nic"o*lous (?), a. [Sphagnum + L. colere to inhabit.] (Bot.)
Growing in moss of the genus Sphagnum.

Sphag"nous (?), a. (Bot.) Pertaining to moss of the genus Sphagnum, or
bog moss; abounding in peat or bog moss.

||Sphag"num (?), n. [NL., fr/ Gr. &?;&?;&?; a kind of moss.] (Bot.) A
||genus of mosses having white leaves slightly tinged with red or green
||and found growing in marshy places; bog moss; peat moss.

Sphal"er*ite (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; slippery, uncertain. See Blende.]
(Min.) Zinc sulphide; -- called also blende, black-jack, false galena,
etc. See Blende (a).

Sphene (?), n. [F. sphène, fr. Gr. sfh`n a wedge.] (Min.) A mineral
found usually in thin, wedge-shaped crystals of a yellow or green to
black color. It is a silicate of titanium and calcium; titanite.

Sphe*neth"moid (?), a. [Sphenoid + ethmoid.] (Anat.) Of or pertaining
to both the sphenoidal and the ethmoidal regions of the skull, or the
sphenethmoid bone; sphenethmoidal.

Sphenethmoid bone (Anat.), a bone of the skull which surrounds the
anterior end of the brain in many amphibia; the girdle bone.

Sphe*neth"moid, n. (Anat.) The sphenethmoid bone.

Sphe`neth*moid"al (?), a. (Anat.) Relating to the sphenoethmoid bone;
sphenoethmoid.

Sphe*nis"can (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of penguin.

Sphe"no- (?). A combining form used in anatomy to indicate connection
with, or relation to, the sphenoid bone; as in sphenomaxillary,
sphenopalatine.

Sphe"no*don (?), n. [Gr. sfh`n a wedge + &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;, a
tooth.] (Zoöl.) Same as Hatteria.

Sphe"no*eth*moid`al (?), a. (Anat.) Sphenethmoid.

Sphe"no*gram (?), n. [Gr. sfh`n a wedge + -gram.] A cuneiform, or
arrow- headed, character.

Sphe*nog"ra*pher, n. One skilled in sphenography; a sphenographist.

Sphe`no*graph"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to sphenography.

Sphe*nog"ra*phist (?), n. A sphenographer.

Sphe*nog"ra*phy (?), n. [Gr. sfh`n a wedge + -graphy.] The art of
writing in cuneiform characters, or of deciphering inscriptions made in
such characters.

Sphe"noid (?), a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;; sfh`n a wedge + e'i^dos form: cf. F.
sphénoïde.] 1. Wedge-shaped; as, a sphenoid crystal.

2. (Anat.) Of or pertaining to the sphenoid bone.

Sphenoid bone (Anat.), an irregularly shaped bone in front of the
occipital in the base of the skull of the higher vertebrates. It is
composed of several fetal bones which become united the adult. See
Alisphenoid, Basisphenoid, Orbitosphenoid, Presphenoid.

Sphe"noid (?), n. 1. (Crystallog.) A wedge-shaped crystal bounded by
four equal isosceles triangles. It is the hemihedral form of a square
pyramid.

2. (Anat.) The sphenoid bone.

Sphe*noid"al (?), a. 1. Sphenoid.

2. (Crystalloq.) Pertaining to, or resembling, a sphenoid.

Sphe*not"ic (?), a. [Spheno- + &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;, the ear.] (Anat.)
Of, pertaining to, or designating, the sphenotic bone.

Sphenotic bone (Anat.), a bone on the anterior side of the auditory
capsule of many fishes, and connected with, or adjoining, the sphenoid
bone.

Sphe*not"ic, n. (Anat.) The sphenotic bone.

Spher"al (?), a. 1. Of or pertaining to a sphere or the spheres.

2. Rounded like a sphere; sphere-shaped; hence, symmetrical; complete;
perfect.

Sphere (?), n. [OE. spere, OF. espere, F. sphère, L. sphaera,. Gr.
&?;&?;&?; a sphere, a ball.] 1. (Geom.) A body or space contained under
a single surface, which in every part is equally distant from a point
within called its center.

2. Hence, any globe or globular body, especially a celestial one, as
the sun, a planet, or the earth.

    Of celestial bodies, first the sun, A mighty sphere, he framed.


Milton.

3. (Astron.) (a) The apparent surface of the heavens, which is assumed
to be spherical and everywhere equally distant, in which the heavenly
bodies appear to have their places, and on which the various
astronomical circles, as of right ascension and declination, the
equator, ecliptic, etc., are conceived to be drawn; an ideal
geometrical sphere, with the astronomical and geographical circles in
their proper positions on it. (b) In ancient astronomy, one of the
concentric and eccentric revolving spherical transparent shells in
which the stars, sun, planets, and moon were supposed to be set, and by
which they were carried, in such a manner as to produce their apparent
motions.

4. (Logic) The extension of a general conception, or the totality of
the individuals or species to which it may be applied.

5. Circuit or range of action, knowledge, or influence; compass;
province; employment; place of existence.

    To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in 't.


Shak.

    Taking her out of the ordinary relations with humanity, and
    inclosing her in a sphere by herself.


Hawthorne.

    Each in his hidden sphere of joy or woe Our hermit spirits dwell.


Keble.

6. Rank; order of society; social positions.

7. An orbit, as of a star; a socket. [R.] Shak.

Armillary sphere, Crystalline sphere, Oblique sphere,. See under
Armillary, Crystalline,. -- Doctrine of the sphere, applications of the
principles of spherical trigonometry to the properties and relations of
the circles of the sphere, and the problems connected with them, in
astronomy and geography, as to the latitudes and longitudes, distance
and bearing, of places on the earth, and the right ascension and
declination, altitude and azimuth, rising and setting, etc., of the
heavenly bodies; spherical geometry. -- Music of the spheres. See under
Music.

Syn. -- Globe; orb; circle. See Globe.

Sphere (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sphered (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sphering.]
1. To place in a sphere, or among the spheres; to insphere.

    The glorious planet Sol In noble eminence enthroned and sphered
    Amidst the other.


Shak.

2. To form into roundness; to make spherical, or spheral; to perfect.
Tennyson.

{ Spher"ic*al (?), Spher"ic (?), } a. [L. sphaericus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;:
cf. F. sphérique.] 1. Having the form of a sphere; like a sphere;
globular; orbicular; as, a spherical body.

2. Of or pertaining to a sphere.

3. Of or pertaining to the heavenly orbs, or to the sphere or spheres
in which, according to ancient astronomy and astrology, they were set.

    Knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance.


Shak.

    Though the stars were suns, and overburned Their spheric
    limitations.


Mrs. Browning.

Spherical angle, Spherical coördinate, Spherical excess, etc. See under
Angle, Coordinate, etc. -- Spherical geometry, that branch of geometry
which treats of spherical magnitudes; the doctrine of the sphere,
especially of the circles described on its surface. -- Spherical
harmonic analysis. See under Harmonic, a. -- Spherical lune,portion of
the surface of a sphere included between two great semicircles having a
common diameter. -- Spherical opening, the magnitude of a solid angle.
It is measured by the portion within the solid angle of the surface of
any sphere whose center is the angular point. -- Spherical
polygon,portion of the surface of a sphere bounded by the arcs of three
or more great circles. -- Spherical projection, the projection of the
circles of the sphere upon a plane. See Projection. -- Spherical
sector. See under Sector. -- Spherical segment, the segment of a
sphere. See under Segment. -- Spherical triangle,re on the surface of a
sphere, bounded by the arcs of three great circles which intersect each
other. -- Spherical trigonometry. See Trigonometry.

-- Spher"ic*al*ly, adv. -- Spher"ic*al*ness, n.

Sphe*ric"i*ty (?), n. [Cf. F. sphéricité.] The quality or state of
being spherial; roundness; as, the sphericity of the planets, or of a
drop of water.

Spher"i*cle (?), n. A small sphere.

Spher"ics (?), n. (Math.) The doctrine of the sphere; the science of
the properties and relations of the circles, figures, and other
magnitudes of a sphere, produced by planes intersecting it; spherical
geometry and trigonometry.

||Sphe`ro*bac*te"ri*a (?), n. pl.; sing. Spherobacterium (&?;). [NL.
||See Sphere, and Bacterium.] (Biol.) See the Note under Microbacteria.

Sphe`ro*con"ic (?), n. (Geom.) A nonplane curve formed by the
intersection of the surface of an oblique cone with the surface of a
sphere whose center is at the vertex of the cone.

Spher"o*graph (?), n. [Sphere + -graph.] An instrument for facilitating
the practical use of spherics in navigation and astronomy, being
constructed of two cardboards containing various circles, and turning
upon each other in such a manner that any possible spherical triangle
may be readily found, and the measures of the parts read off by
inspection.

Sphe"roid (?), n. [L. spheroides ball-like, spherical, Gr. &?;&?;&?;;
&?;&?;&?;&?; sphere + &?;&?;&?; form: cf. F. sphéroïde.] A body or
figure approaching to a sphere, but not perfectly spherical; esp., a
solid generated by the revolution of an ellipse about one of its axes.

Oblate spheroid, Prolate spheroid. See Oblate, Prolate, and Ellipsoid.

Sphe*roid"al (?), a. [Cf. F. sphéroïdal.] Having the form of a
spheroid. -- Sphe*roid"al*ly, adv.

Spheroidal state (Physics.), the state of a liquid, as water, when, on
being thrown on a surface of highly heated metal, it rolls about in
spheroidal drops or masses, at a temperature several degrees below
ebullition, and without actual contact with the heated surface, -- a
phenomenon due to the repulsive force of heat, the intervention of a
cushion of nonconducting vapor, and the cooling effect of evaporation.

{ Sphe*roid"ic (?), Sphe*roid"ic*al (?), } a. See Spheroidal. Cheyne.

{ Sphe`roi*dic"i*ty (?), Sphe*roid"i*ty (?), } n. The quality or state
of being spheroidal.

Sphe"ro*mere (?), n. [Sphere + -mere.] (Zoöl.) Any one of the several
symmetrical segments arranged around the central axis and composing the
body of a radiate anmal.

Sphe*rom"e*ter (?), n. [Sphere + -meter: cf. F. sphéromètre.] (Physics)
An instrument for measuring the curvature of spherical surface, as of
lenses for telescope, etc.

Spher`o*sid"er*ite (?), n. [Sphere + siderite.] (Min.) Siderite
occuring in spheroidal masses.

Sphe"ro*some (?), n. [Sphere + -some body.] (Zoöl.) The body wall of
any radiate animal.

Spher"u*late (?), a. Covered or set with spherules; having one or more
rows of spherules, or minute tubercles.

Spher"ule (?), n. [L. spherula: cf. F. sphérule.] A little sphere or
spherical body; as, quicksilver, when poured upon a plane, divides
itself into a great number of minute spherules.

Spher"u*lite (?), n. [Cf. F. sphérulite.] (Min.) A minute spherical
crystalline body having a radiated structure, observed in some vitreous
volcanic rocks, as obsidian and pearlstone.

Spher`u*lit"ic (?), a. Of or pertaining to a spherulite; characterized
by the presence of spherulites.

Spher"y (?), a. 1. Round; spherical; starlike. [R.] "Hermia's sphery
eyne." Shak.

2. Of or pertaining to the spheres. [R.]

    She can teach ye how to climb Higher than the sphery chime.


Milton.

Sphex (?), n.[NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;, a wasp.] (Zoöl.) Any
one of numerous species of sand wasps of the genus Sphex and allied
genera. These wasps have the abdomen attached to the thorax by a
slender pedicel. See Illust. of Sand wasp, under Sand.

Sphex fly (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of small dipterous flies
of the genus Conops and allied genera. The form of the body is similar
to that of a sphex.

Sphig*mom"e*ter (?), n. See Sphygmometer.

Sphinc"ter (?), n. [NL., fr. &?;&?;&?; to bind tight.] (Anat.) A muscle
which surrounds, and by its contraction tends to close, a natural
opening; as, the sphincter of the bladder.

Sphinc"ter, a. (Anat.) Of, pertaining to, or designating, a sphincter;
as, a sphincter muscle.

Sphin"gid (?), n. (Zoöl.) A sphinx.

Sphin"gid, a. Of or pertaining to a sphinx, or the family Sphingidæ.

Sphinx (?), n. [L., from Gr. sfi`gx, usually derived from sfi`ggein to
bind tight or together, as if the Throttler.] 1. (a) In Egyptian art,
an image of granite or porphyry, having a human head, or the head of a
ram or of a hawk, upon the wingless body of a lion.

    The awful ruins of the days of old . . . Or jasper tomb, or
    mutilated sphinx.


Shelley.

(b) On Greek art and mythology, a she-monster, usually represented as
having the winged body of a lion, and the face and breast of a young
woman. The most famous Grecian sphinx, that of Thebes in Bœotia, is
said to have proposed a riddle to the Thebans, and killed those who
were unable to guess it. The enigma was solved by Œdipus, whereupon the
sphinx slew herself. "Subtle as sphinx." Shak.

2. Hence: A person of enigmatical character and purposes, especially in
politics and diplomacy.

3. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of large moths of the family
Sphingidæ; -- called also hawk moth.

The larva is a stout naked caterpillar which, when at rest, often
assumes a position suggesting the Egyptian sphinx, whence the name.

4. (Zoöl.) The Guinea, or sphinx, baboon (Cynocephalus sphinx).

Sphinx baboon (Zoöl.), a large West African baboon (Cynocephalus
sphinx), often kept in menageries. -- Sphinx moth. (Zoöl.) Same as
Sphinx, 3.

Sphrag"ide (?), n.[L. sphragis, -idis, Lemnian earth, fr. Gr.
&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;, a seal; -- so called because sold in sealed
packets.] (Min.) Lemnian earth.

Sphra*gis"tics (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; of or for sealing, fr.
&?;&?;&?; a seal.] The science of seals, their history, age,
distinctions, etc., esp. as verifying the age and genuiness of
documents.

||Sphri*go"sis (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; to be full of strength.]
||(Bot.) A condition of vegetation in which there is too abundant
||growth of the stem and leaves, accompanied by deficiency of flowers
||and fruit.

Sphyg"mic (?), a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; the pulse.] (Physiol.) Of or
pertaining to the pulse.

Sphyg"mo*gram (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; pulse + -gram.] (Physiol.) A
tracing, called a pulse tracing, consisting of a series of curves
corresponding with the beats of the heart, obtained by the application
of the sphygmograph.

Sphyg"mo*graph (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; the pulse + -graph.] (Physiol.)
An instrument which, when applied over an artery, indicates graphically
the movements or character of the pulse. See Sphygmogram.

Sphyg`mo*graph"ic (?), a. (Phusiol.) Relating to, or produced by, a
sphygmograph; as, a sphygmographic tracing.

<! p. 1385 !>

Sphyg*mom"e*ter (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; pulse + -meter.] (Physiol.)
An instrument for measuring the strength of the pulse beat; a
sphygmograph.

Sphyg"mo*phone (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; the pulse + &?;&?;&?; sound.]
(Physiol.) An electrical instrument for determining by the ear the
rhythm of the pulse of a person at a distance.

Sphyg"mo*scope (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; the pulse + -scope.] (Physiol.)
Same as Sphygmograph.

Sphy*ræ"noid (?), a.[L. sphyraena a kind of sea fish (Gr. sfy`raina) +
- oid.] (Zoöl.) Of or pertaining to the Sphyrænidæ, a family of marine
fishes including the barracudas.

Spi"al (?), n. A spy; a scout. [Obs.] Bacon.

||Spi"ca (?), n.; pl. Spicæ (#). [L., an ear, as of corn.] 1. (Med.) A
||kind of bandage passing, by successive turns and crosses, from an
||extremity to the trunk; -- so called from its resemblance to a spike
||of a barley.

2. (Astron.) A star of the first magnitude situated in the
constellation Virgo.

{ Spi"cate (?), Spi"ca*ted (?), } a. [L. spicatus, p. p. of spicare
furnish with spikes, or ears, fr. spica a spike, or ear.] (Bot.) Having
the form of a spike, or ear; arranged in a spike or spikes. Lee.

||Spic*ca"to (?), a. [It., p. p. of spicare to detach, to separate.]
||(Mus.) Detached; separated; -- a term indicating that every note is
||to be performed in a distinct and pointed manner.

Spice (?), n. [OE. spice, spece, spice, species, OF. espice, espece, F.
épice spice, espèce species, fr. L. species particular sort or kind, a
species, a sight, appearance, show, LL., spices, drugs, etc., of the
same sort, fr. L. specere to look. See Spy, and cf. Species.] 1.
Species; kind. [Obs.]

    The spices of penance ben three.


Chaucer.

    Abstain you from all evil spice.


Wyclif (1. Thess,v. 22).

    Justice, although it be but one entire virtue, yet is described in
    two kinds of spices. The one is named justice distributive, the
    other is called commutative.


Sir T. Elyot.

2. A vegetable production of many kinds, fragrant or aromatic and
pungent to the taste, as pepper, cinnamon, nutmeg, mace, allspice,
ginger, cloves, etc., which are used in cookery and to flavor sauces,
pickles, etc.

    Hast thou aught in thy purse [bag] any hot spices?


Piers Plowman.

3. Figuratively, that which enriches or alters the quality of a thing
in a small degree, as spice alters the taste of food; that which gives
zest or pungency; a slight flavoring; a relish; hence, a small quantity
or admixture; a sprinkling; as, a spice of mischief.

    So much of the will, with a spice of the willful.


Coleridge.

Spice, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spiced (?); p. p. & vb. n. Spicing (?).] 1.
To season with spice, or as with spice; to mix aromatic or pungent
substances with; to flavor; to season; as, to spice wine; to spice
one's words with wit.

    She 'll receive thee, but will spice thy bread With flowery
    poisons.


Chapman.

2. To fill or impregnate with the odor of spices.

    In the spiced Indian air, by night.


Shak.

3. To render nice or dainty; hence, to render scrupulous. [Obs.] "A
spiced conscience." Chaucer.

Spice"bush` (?), n. (Bot.) Spicewood.

Spice"nut` (?). A small crisp cake, highly spiced.

Spi"cer (?), n. [Cf. OF. espicier, F. épicier.] 1. One who seasons with
spice.

2. One who deals in spice. [Obs.] Piers Plowman.

Spi"cer*y (?), n. [OF. espicerie, F. épicerie.] 1. Spices, in general.
Chaucer.

2. A repository of spices. Addison.

Spice"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) An American shrub (Lindera Benzoin), the
bark of which has a spicy taste and odor; -- called also Benjamin, wild
allspice, and fever bush.

Spi*cif"er*ous (?), a. [L. spicifer bearing spikes, or ears; spica ear
+ ferre to bear.] Bearing ears, or spikes; spicate. [Obs.] Bailey.

Spi"ci*form (?), a. [L. spica a spike, ear + -form.] (Bot.)
Spike-shaped. Gray.

Spi"ci*ly, adv. In a spicy manner.

Spi"ci*ness, n. The quality or state of being spicy.

Spick (?), n. [Cf. Sw. spik. See Spike a nail.] A spike or nail. [Prov.
Eng.]

Spick and span, quite new; that is, as new as a spike or nail just made
and a chip just split; brand-new; as, a spick and span novelty. See
Span-new. Howell.

Spick"nel (?), n. [Contr. from spike nail a large, long nail; -- so
called in allusion to the shape of its capillary leaves.] (Bot.) An
umbelliferous herb (Meum Athamanticum) having finely divided leaves,
common in Europe; -- called also baldmoney, mew, and bearwort. [Written
also spignel.]

Spi*cose" (?), a. [L. spica a spike, or ear.] (Bot.) Having spikes, or
ears, like corn spikes.

Spi*cos"i*ty (?), n. The state of having, or being full of, ears like
corn. [R.] Bailey.

Spi"cous (?), a. (Bot.) See Spicose.

||Spic"u*la (?), n.; pl. Spiculæ (#). [NL., dim. of L. spica a spike,
||ear.] (Bot.) (a) A little spike; a spikelet. (b) A pointed fleshy
||appendage.

Spic"u*lar (?), a. [L. spiculum a dart: cf. F. spiculaire.] Resembling
a dart; having sharp points.

Spic"u*late (?), a. [L. spiculatus, p. p. of spiculare to sharpen, to
point, fr. spiculum a dart.] 1. Covered with, or having, spicules.

2. (Bot.) Covered with minute spiculæ, or pointed fleshy appendages;
divided into small spikelets.

Spic"u*late (?), v. t. To sharpen to a point. [R.] "With spiculated
paling." Mason.

Spic"ule (?), n. [L. spiculum a little point, a dart.] 1. A minute,
slender granule, or point.

2. (Bot.) Same as Spicula.

3. (Zoöl.) Any small calcareous or siliceous body found in the tissues
of various invertebrate animals, especially in sponges and in most
Alcyonaria.

Spicules vary exceedingly in size and shape, and some of those found in
siliceous sponges are very complex in structure and elegant in form.
They are of great use in classification.

    Description of the Illustration:


    a Acerate; b Tricurvate, or Bowshaped; c d Hamate; e Broomshaped; f
    Scepterellate; g Spinispirulate; h Inequi-anchorate; i Sexradiate;
    j A Trichite Sheaf; k Six-rayed Capitate; l Rosette of Esperia; m
    Equi- anchorate.


Spi*cu"li*form (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the shape of a spicule.

Spic`u*lig"e*nous (?), a. [L. spiculum + -genous.] (Zoöl.) Producing or
containing spicules.

||Spic`u*li*spon"gi*æ (?), n. pl. [NL.] (Zoöl.) A division of sponges
||including those which have independent siliceous spicules.

||Spic"u*lum (?), n.; pl. Spicula (#). [L., a little point.] (Zoöl.)
||Same as Spicule.

Spi"cy (?), a. [Compar. Spicier (?); superl. Spiciest.] [From Spice.]
1. Flavored with, or containing, spice or spices; fragrant; aromatic;
as, spicy breezes. "The spicy nut-brown ale." Milton.

    Led by new stars, and borne by spicy gales.


Pope.

2. Producing, or abounding with, spices.

    In hot Ceylon spicy forests grew.


Dryden.

3. Fig.: Piquant; racy; as, a spicy debate.

Syn. -- Aromatic; fragrant; smart; pungent; pointed; keen. See Racy.

Spi"der (?), n.[OE. spiþre, fr. AS. spinnan to spin; -- so named from
spinning its web; cf. D. spin a spider, G. spinne, Sw. spindel. Seee
Spin.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of numerous species of arachnids comprising
the order Araneina. Spiders have the mandibles converted into poison
fangs, or falcers. The abdomen is large and not segmented, with two or
three pairs of spinnerets near the end, by means of which they spin
threads of silk to form cocoons, or nests, to protect their eggs and
young. Many species spin also complex webs to entrap the insects upon
which they prey. The eyes are usually eight in number (rarely six), and
are situated on the back of the cephalothorax. See Illust. under
Araneina.

Spiders are divided into two principal groups: the Dipneumona, having
two lungs: and the Tetrapneumona, having four lungs. See Mygale. The
former group includes several tribes; as, the jumping spiders (see
Saltigradæ), the wolf spiders, or Citigradæ (see under Wolf), the crab
spiders, or Laterigradæ (see under Crab), the garden, or geometric,
spiders, or Orbitellæ (see under Geometrical, and Garden), and others.
See Bird spider, under Bird, Grass spider, under Grass, House spider,
under House, Silk spider, under Silk.

2. (Zoöl.) Any one of various other arachnids resembling the true
spiders, especially certain mites, as the red spider (see under Red).

3. An iron pan with a long handle, used as a kitchen utensil in frying
food. Originally, it had long legs, and was used over coals on the
hearth.

4. A trevet to support pans or pots over a fire.

5. (Mach.) A skeleton, or frame, having radiating arms or members,
often connected by crosspieces; as, a casting forming the hub and
spokes to which the rim of a fly wheel or large gear is bolted; the
body of a piston head; a frame for strengthening a core or mold for a
casting, etc.

Spider ant. (Zoöl.) Same as Solitary ant, under Solitary. -- Spider
crab (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of maioid crabs having a more
or less triangular body and ten long legs. Some of the species grow to
great size, as the great Japanese spider crab (Macrocheira Kempferi),
measuring sometimes more than fifteen feet across the legs when they
are extended. -- Spider fly (Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of
parasitic dipterous insects of the family Hippoboscidæ. They are mostly
destitute of wings, and live among the feathers of birds and the hair
of bats. Called also bird tick, and bat tick. -- Spider hunter (Zoöl.),
any one of several species of East Indian sunbirds of the genus
Arachnothera. -- Spider lines, filaments of a spider's web crossing the
field of vision in optical instruments; -- used for determining the
exact position of objects and making delicate measurements. Fine wires,
silk fibers, or lines on glass similarly placed, are called spider
lines. -- Spider mite. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of several species of
parasitic mites of the genus Argas and allied genera. See Argas. (b)
Any one of numerous small mites injurious to plants. -- Spider monkey
(Zoöl.), any one of numerous species of South American monkeys of the
genus Ateles, having very long legs and a long prehensile tail. --
Spider orchis (Bot.), a European orchidaceous plant (Ophrys aranifera),
having flowers which resemble spiders. -- Spider shell (Zoöl.), any
shell of the genus Pteroceras. See Pteroceras.

Spi"dered (?), a. Infested by spiders; cobwebbed. Wolcott.

Spi"der*like` (?), a. Like a spider. Shak.

{ Spi"der web" (?), or Spi"der's web" }. (Zoöl.) The silken web which
is formed by most kinds of spiders, particularly the web spun to entrap
their prey. See Geometric spider, Triangle spider, under Geometric, and
Triangle.

Spi"der*wort` (?), n. (Bot.) An American endogenous plant (Tradescantia
Virginica), with long linear leaves and ephemeral blue flowers. The
name is sometimes extended to other species of the same genus.

Spied (?), imp. & p. p. of Spy.

||Spie"gel*ei`sen (?), n. [G. spiegel mirror + eisen iron.] See Spiegel
||iron.

Spie"gel i`ron (?). [G. spiegel mirror + E. iron.] (Metal.) A fusible
white cast iron containing a large amount of carbon (from three and a
half to six per cent) and some manganese. When the manganese reaches
twenty-five per cent and upwards it has a granular structure, and
constitutes the alloy ferro manganese, largely used in the manufacture
of Bessemer steel. Called also specular pig iron, spiegel, and
spiegeleisen.

Spight (?), n. & v. Spite. [Obs.] Spenser.

Spight, n. A woodpecker. See Speight. [Obs.]

Spig"nel (?), n. (Bot.) Same as Spickenel.

Spig"net (?), n. [Corrupted fr. spikenard.] (Bot.) An aromatic plant of
America. See Spikenard.

Spig"ot (?), n. [From spick,or spike; cf. Ir. & Gael. spiocaid a
spigot, Ir. spice a spike. See Spike.] A pin or peg used to stop the
vent in a cask; also, the plug of a faucet or cock.

Spigot and faucet joint, a joint for uniting pipes, formed by the
insertion of the end of one pipe, or pipe fitting, into a socket at the
end of another.

Spi*gur"nel (?), n. (Eng. Law) Formerly the title of the sealer of
writs in chancery. Mozley & W.

Spike (?), n. [Akin to LG. spiker, spieker, a large nail, D. spijker,
Sw. spik, Dan. spiger, Icel. spk; all perhaps from L. spica a point, an
ear of grain; but in the sense of nail more likely akin to E. spoke of
a wheel. Cf. Spine.] 1. A sort of very large nail; also, a piece of
pointed iron set with points upward or outward.

2. Anything resembling such a nail in shape.

    He wears on his head the corona radiata . . . ; the spikes that
    shoot out represent the rays of the sun.


Addison.

3. An ear of corn or grain.

4. (Bot.) A kind of flower cluster in which sessile flowers are
arranged on an unbranched elongated axis.

Spike grass (Bot.), either of two tall perennial American grasses
(Uniola paniculata, and U. latifolia) having broad leaves and large
flattened spikelets. -- Spike rush. (Bot.) See under Rush. -- Spike
shell (Zoöl.), any pteropod of the genus Styliola having a slender
conical shell. -- Spike team, three horses, or a horse and a yoke of
oxen, harnessed together, a horse leading the oxen or the span. [U.S.]

Spike, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spiked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spiking.] 1. To
fasten with spikes, or long, large nails; as, to spike down planks.

2. To set or furnish with spikes.

3. To fix on a spike. [R.] Young.

4. To stop the vent of (a gun or cannon) by driving a spike nail, or
the like into it.

Spike, n. [Cf. G. spieke, L. spica an ear of grain. See Spikenard.]
(Bot.) Spike lavender. See Lavender.

Oil of spike (Chem.), a colorless or yellowish aromatic oil extracted
from the European broad-leaved lavender, or aspic (Lavendula Spica),
used in artist's varnish and in veterinary medicine. It is often
adulterated with oil of turpentine, which it much resembles.

Spike"bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) The hooded merganser. (b) The marbled
godwit (Limosa fedoa).

Spiked (?), a. Furnished or set with spikes, as corn; fastened with
spikes; stopped with spikes.

    A youth, leaping over the spiked pales, . . . was caught by those
    spikes.


Wiseman.

Spike"fish` (?), n. (Zoöl.) See Sailfish (a)

Spike"let (?), n. (Bot.) A small or secondary spike; especially, one of
the ultimate parts of the in florescence of grasses. See Illust. of
Quaking grass.

Spike"nard (?), n.[For spiked nard; cf. G. spieknarde, NL. spica nardi.
See Spike an ear, and Nard.] 1. (Bot.) An aromatic plant. In the United
States it is the Aralia racemosa, often called spignet, and used as a
medicine. The spikenard of the ancients is the Nardostachys Jatamansi,
a native of the Himalayan region. From its blackish roots a perfume for
the hair is still prepared in India.

2. A fragrant essential oil, as that from the Nardostachys Jatamansi.

Spike"tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The pintail duck. [Local, U.S.]

Spik"y (?), a. 1. Like a spike; spikelike.

    These spiky, vivid outbursts of metallic vapors.


C. A. Young.

2. Having a sharp point, or sharp points; furnished or armed with
spikes.

    Or by the spiky harrow cleared away.


Dyer.

    The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore.


Pope.

Spile (?), n. [Cf. LG. spile, dial. G. speil, speiler, D. spijl.
&radic;170.] 1. A small plug or wooden pin, used to stop a vent, as in
a cask.

<! p. 1386 !>

2. A small tube or spout inserted in a tree for conducting sap, as from
a sugar maple.

3. A large stake driven into the ground as a support for some
superstructure; a pile.

Spile hole, a small air hole in a cask; a vent.

Spile (?), v. t. To supply with a spile or a spigot; to make a small
vent in, as a cask.

Spil"i*kin (?), n. [OD. spelleken a small pin. See Spill a splinter.]
One of a number of small pieces or pegs of wood, ivory, bone, or other
material, for playing a game, or for counting the score in a game, as
in cribbage. In the plural (spilikins), a game played with such pieces;
pushpin. [Written also spillikin, spilliken.]

Spill (?), n. [&radic;170. Cf. Spell a splinter.] 1. A bit of wood
split off; a splinter. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

2. A slender piece of anything. Specifically: --

(a) A peg or pin for plugging a hole, as in a cask; a spile.

(b) A metallic rod or pin.

(c) A small roll of paper, or slip of wood, used as a lamplighter, etc.

(d) (Mining) One of the thick laths or poles driven horizontally ahead
of the main timbering in advancing a level in loose ground.

3. A little sum of money. [Obs.] Ayliffe.

Spill, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spilt (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spilling.] To
cover or decorate with slender pieces of wood, metal, ivory, etc.; to
inlay. [Obs.] Spenser.

Spill (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spilled (?), or Spilt (&?;); p. pr. &
vb. n. Spilling.] [OE. spillen,sually, to destroy, AS. spillan,
spildan, to destroy; akin to Icel. spilla to destroy, Sw. spilla to
spill, Dan. spilde,G. & D. spillen to squander, OHG. spildan.] 1. To
destroy; to kill; to put an end to. [Obs.]

    And gave him to the queen, all at her will To choose whether she
    would him save or spill.


Chaucer.

    Greater glory think [it] to save than spill.


Spenser.

2. To mar; to injure; to deface; hence, to destroy by misuse; to waste.
[Obs.]

    They [the colors] disfigure the stuff and spill the whole
    workmanship.


Puttenham.

    Spill not the morning, the quintessence of day, in recreations.


Fuller.

3. To suffer to fall or run out of a vessel; to lose, or suffer to be
scattered; -- applied to fluids and to substances whose particles are
small and loose; as, to spill water from a pail; to spill quicksilver
from a vessel; to spill powder from a paper; to spill sand or flour.

Spill differs from pour in expressing accidental loss, -- a loss or
waste contrary to purpose.

4. To cause to flow out and be lost or wasted; to shed, or suffer to be
shed, as in battle or in manslaughter; as, a man spills another's
blood, or his own blood.

    And to revenge his blood so justly spilt.


Dryden.

5. (Naut.) To relieve a sail from the pressure of the wind, so that it
can be more easily reefed or furled, or to lessen the strain.

Spilling line (Naut.), a rope used for spilling, or dislodging, the
wind from the belly of a sail. Totten.

Spill, v. i. 1. To be destroyed, ruined, or wasted; to come to ruin; to
perish; to waste. [Obs.]

    That thou wilt suffer innocents to spill.


Chaucer.

2. To be shed; to run over; to fall out, and be lost or wasted. "He was
so topful of himself, that he let it spill on all the company." I.
Watts.

Spill"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, spills.

2. A kind of fishing line with many hooks; a boulter.

{ Spil"let fish`ing (?), Spil"liard fish`ing (?), } A system or method
of fishing by means of a number of hooks set on snoods all on one line;
-- in North America, called trawl fishing, bultow, or bultow fishing,
and long-line fishing.

Spil"li*kin (?), n. See Spilikin.

Spill"way` (?), n. A sluiceway or passage for superfluous water in a
reservoir, to prevent too great pressure on the dam.

Spilt (?), imp. & p. p. of Spill. Spilled.

Spil"ter (?), n. [From Spill, n.] Any one of the small branches on a
stag's head. [Obs.] Howell.

Spilth (?), n. [From Spill.] Anything spilt, or freely poured out;
slop; effusion. [Archaic] "With drunken spilth of wine." Shak.

    Choicest cates, and the flagon's best spilth.


R. Browning.

Spin (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spun (?) (Archaic imp. Span (&?;)); p.
pr. & vb. n. Spinning.] [AS. spinnan; akin to D. & G. spinnen, Icel. &
Sw. spinna, Dan. spinde, Goth. spinnan, and probably to E. span.
&radic;170. Cf. Span, v. t., Spider.] 1. To draw out, and twist into
threads, either by the hand or machinery; as, to spin wool, cotton, or
flax; to spin goat's hair; to produce by drawing out and twisting a
fibrous material.

    All the yarn she [Penelope] spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill
    Ithaca full of moths.


Shak.

2. To draw out tediously; to form by a slow process, or by degrees; to
extend to a great length; -- with out; as, to spin out large volumes on
a subject.

    Do you mean that story is tediously spun out?


Sheridan.

3. To protract; to spend by delays; as, to spin out the day in
idleness.

    By one delay after another they spin out their whole lives.


L'Estrange.

4. To cause to turn round rapidly; to whirl; to twirl; as, to spin a
top.

5. To form (a web, a cocoon, silk, or the like) from threads produced
by the extrusion of a viscid, transparent liquid, which hardens on
coming into contact with the air; -- said of the spider, the silkworm,
etc.

6. (Mech.) To shape, as malleable sheet metal, into a hollow form, by
bending or buckling it by pressing against it with a smooth hand tool
or roller while the metal revolves, as in a lathe.

To spin a yarn (Naut.), to tell a story, esp. a long or fabulous tale.
-- To spin hay (Mil.), to twist it into ropes for convenient carriage
on an expedition. -- To spin street yarn, to gad about gossiping.
[Collog.]

Spin (?), v. i. 1. To practice spinning; to work at drawing and
twisting threads; to make yarn or thread from fiber; as, the woman
knows how to spin; a machine or jenny spins with great exactness.

    They neither know to spin, nor care to toll.


Prior.

2. To move round rapidly; to whirl; to revolve, as a top or a spindle,
about its axis.

    Round about him spun the landscape, Sky and forest reeled together.


Longfellow.

    With a whirligig of jubilant mosquitoes spinning about each head.


G. W. Cable.

3. To stream or issue in a thread or a small current or jet; as, blood
spinsfrom a vein. Shak.

4. To move swifty; as, to spin along the road in a carriage, on a
bicycle, etc. [Colloq.]

Spin, n. 1. The act of spinning; as, the spin of a top; a spin a
bicycle. [Colloq.]

2. (Kinematics) Velocity of rotation about some specified axis.

||Spi"na bif"i*da (?). (Med.) [L., cleft spine.] A congenital
||malformation in which the spinal column is cleft at its lower
||portion, and the membranes of the spinal cord project as an elastic
||swelling from the gap thus formed.

Spi*na"ceous (?), a. (Bot.) Of, pertaining to, or resembling, the plant
spinach, or the family of plants to which it belongs.

{ Spin"ach, Spin"age } (?), n. [OF. espinache, espinoche, F. épinard;
cf. F. spinace, Sp. espinaca; all fr. Ar. isfnj, isfinj, aspankh,
probably of Persian origin.] (Bot.) A common pot herb (Spinacia
oleracea) belonging to the Goosefoot family.

Mountain spinach. See Garden orache, under Orache. -- New Zealand
spinach (Bot.), a coarse herb (Tetragonia expansa), a poor substitute
for spinach.

Various other pot herbs are locally called spinach.

Spi"nal (?), a. [L. spinalis, fr. spina the spine: cf. F. spinal. See
Spine.] 1. (Anat.) Of, pertaining to, or in the region of, the
backbone, or vertebral column; rachidian; vertebral.

2. Of or pertaining to a spine or spines.

Spinal accessory nerves, the eleventh pair of cranial nerves in the
higher vertebrates. They originate from the spinal cord and pass
forward into the skull, from which they emerge in company with the
pneumogastrics. -- Spinal column, the backbone, or connected series or
vertebræ which forms the axis of the vertebrate skeleton; the spine;
rachis; vertebral column. -- Spinal cord, the great nervous cord
extending backward from the brain along the dorsal side of the spinal
column of a vertebrate animal, and usually terminating in a threadlike
appendage called the filum terminale; the spinal, or vertebral, marrow;
the myelon. The nervous tissue consists of nerve fibers and nerve
cells, the latter being confined to the so-called gray matter of the
central portions of the cord, while the peripheral white matter is
composed of nerve fibers only. The center of the cord is traversed by a
slender canal connecting with the ventricles of the brain.

Spi"nate (?), a. Bearing a spine; spiniform.

Spin"dle (?), n. [AS. spinal, fr. spinnan to spin; akin to D. spil, G.
spille, spindel, OHG. spinnala. &radic;170. See Spin.] 1. The long,
round, slender rod or pin in spinning wheels by which the thread is
twisted, and on which, when twisted, it is wound; also, the pin on
which the bobbin is held in a spinning machine, or in the shuttle of a
loom.

2. A slender rod or pin on which anything turns; an axis; as, the
spindle of a vane. Specifically: --

(a) (Mach.) The shaft, mandrel, or arbor, in a machine tool, as a lathe
or drilling machine, etc., which causes the work to revolve, or carries
a tool or center, etc.

(b) (Mach.) The vertical rod on which the runner of a grinding mill
turns.

(c) (Founding) A shaft or pipe on which a core of sand is formed.

3. The fusee of a watch.

4. A long and slender stalk resembling a spindle.

5. A yarn measure containing, in cotton yarn, 15,120 yards; in linen
yarn, 14,400 yards.

6. (Geom.) A solid generated by the revolution of a curved line about
its base or double ordinate or chord.

7. (Zoöl.) (a) Any marine univalve shell of the genus Rostellaria; --
called also spindle stromb. (b) Any marine gastropod of the genus
Fusus.

Dead spindle (Mach.), a spindle in a machine tool that does not
revolve; the spindle of the tailstock of a lathe. -- Live spindle
(Mach.), the revolving spindle of a machine tool; the spindle of the
headstock of a turning lathe. -- Spindle shell. (Zoöl.) See Spindle, 7.
above. -- Spindle side, the female side in descent; in the female line;
opposed to spear side. Ld. Lytton. [R.] "King Lycaon, grandson, by the
spindle side, of Oceanus." Lowell. -- Spindle tree (Bot.), any shrub or
tree of the genus Eunymus. The wood of E. Europæus was used for
spindles and skewers. See Prickwood.

Spin"dle, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Spindled(?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spindling
(?).] To shoot or grow into a long, slender stalk or body; to become
disproportionately tall and slender.

    It has begun to spindle into overintellectuality.


Lowell.

Spin"dle-legged` (?), a. Having long, slender legs.

Spin"dle*legs` (?), n. A spindleshanks.

Spin"dle-shanked` (?), a. Having long, slender legs. Addison.

Spin"dle*shanks` (?), n. A person with slender shanks, or legs; -- used
humorously or in contempt.

Spin"dle-shaped` (?), a. 1. Having the shape of a spindle.

2. (Bot.) Thickest in the middle, and tapering to both ends; fusiform;
-- applied chiefly to roots.

Spin"dle*tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The pintail duck. [Local, U.S.]

Spin"dle*worm` (?), n. (Zoöl.) The larva of a noctuid mmoth (Achatodes
zeæ) which feeds inside the stalks of corn (maize), sometimes causing
much damage. It is smooth, with a black head and tail and a row of
black dots across each segment.

Spin"dling (?), a. Long and slender, or disproportionately tall and
slender; as, a spindling tree; a spindling boy.

Spine (?), n. [L. spina thorn, the spine; akin to spica a point: cf.
OF. espine, F. épine. Cf. Spike, Spinet a musical instrument, Spinny.]
1. (Bot.) A sharp appendage to any of a plant; a thorn.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) A rigid and sharp projection upon any part of an animal.
(b) One of the rigid and undivided fin rays of a fish.

3. (Anat.) The backbone, or spinal column, of an animal; -- so called
from the projecting processes upon the vertebræ.

4. Anything resembling the spine or backbone; a ridge.

Spine"back` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A fish having spines in, or in front of,
the dorsal fins.

Spine"bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any species of Australian birds of the
genus Acanthorhynchus. They are related to the honey eaters.

Spined (?), a. Furnished with spines; spiny.

Spine"-finned` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having fine supported by spinous fin
rays; -- said of certain fishes.

{ Spi*nel" (?), Spi*nelle" (?), } n. [F. spinelle, or LL. spinellus,
perhaps from L. spina a thorn, a prickle, in allusion to its pointed
crystals.] (Min.) A mineral occuring in octahedrons of great hardness
and various colors, as red, green, blue, brown, and black, the red
variety being the gem spinel ruby. It consist essentially of alumina
and magnesia, but commonly contains iron and sometimes also chromium.

The spinel group includes spinel proper, also magnetite, chromite,
franklinite, gahnite, etc., all of which may be regarded as composed of
a sesquioxide and a protoxide in equal proportions.

Spin"el (?), n. Bleached yarn in making the linen tape called inkle;
unwrought inkle. Knight.

Spine"less (?), a. Having no spine.

Spi*nes"cent (?), a.[L. spinescens, -entis, p. pr. of spinescere to
know to grow thorny, fr. spina a thorn: cf. F. spinescent.] (Bot.)
Becoming hard and thorny; tapering gradually to a rigid, leafless
point; armed with spines. Gray.

Spin"et (?), n. [OF. espinete, F. épinette (cf. It. spinetta), fr. L.
spina a thorn; -- so called because its quills resemble thorns. See
Spine.] (Mus.) A keyed instrument of music resembling a harpsichord,
but smaller, with one string of brass or steel wire to each note,
sounded by means of leather or quill plectrums or jacks. It was
formerly much used.

Dumb spinet. (Mus.) See Manichordon.

Spi"net (?), n. [L. spinetum. See Spinny.] A spinny. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Spine"tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one or several species of swifts of
the genus Acanthylis, or Chætura, and allied genera, in which the
shafts of the tail feathers terminate in rigid spines. (b) Any one of
several species of South American and Central American clamatorial
birds belonging to Synallaxis and allied genera of the family
Dendrocolaptidæ. They are allied to the ovenbirds. (c) The ruddy duck.
[Local, U.S.]

Spine"-tailed (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the tail quills ending in sharp,
naked tips.

Spine-tailed swift. (Zoöl.) See Spinetail (a).

Spin"et*ed (?), a. Slit; cleft. [Obs. & R.]

Spi*nif"er*ous (?), a. [L. spinifer; spina thorn + ferre to produce.]
Producing spines; bearing thorns or spines; thorny; spiny.

Spin"i*form (?), a. Shaped like a spine.

Spi*nig"er*ous (?), a. [L. spiniger; spina spine + gerere to bear.]
Bearing a spine or spines; thorn-bearing.

Spin"i*ness (?), n. Quality of being spiny.

Spin`i-spir"u*late (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having spines arranged spirally. See
Spicule.

Spink (spk), n. [Cf. dial. Sw. spink a kind of small bird, Gr.
spi`ggos, and E. finch.] (Zoöl.) The chaffinch.

Spin"na*ker (?), n. (Naut.) A large triangular sail set upon a boom, --
used when running before the wind.

Spin"ner (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, spins one skilled in
spinning; a spinning machine.

2. A spider. "Long-legged spinners." Shak.

3. (Zoöl.) A goatsucker; -- so called from the peculiar noise it makes
when darting through the air.

4. (Zoöl.) A spinneret.

Ring spinner, a machine for spinning, in which the twist, given to the
yarn by a revolving bobbin, is regulated by the drag of a small metal
loop which slides around a ring encircling the bobbin, instead of by a
throstle.

Spin"ner*et (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of the special jointed organs situated
on the under side, and near the end, of the abdomen of spiders, by
means of which they spin their webs. Most spiders have three pairs of
spinnerets, but some have only two pairs. The ordinary silk line of the
spider is composed of numerous smaller lines jointed after issuing from
the spinnerets.

Spin"ner*ule (?), n. (Zoöl.) One of the numerous small spinning tubes
on the spinnerets of spiders.

Spin"ney (?), n.; pl. Spinneys (&?;). Same as Spinny. T. Hughes.

<! p. 1387 !>

Spin"ning (?), a. & n. from Spin.

Spinning gland (Zoöl.), one of the glands which form the material for
spinning the silk of silkworms and other larvæ. -- Spinning house,
formerly a common name for a house of correction in England, the women
confined therein being employed in spinning. -- Spinning jenny (Mach.),
an engine or machine for spinning wool or cotton, by means of a large
number of spindles revolving simultaneously. -- Spinning mite (Zoöl.),
the red spider. -- Spinning wheel, a machine for spinning yarn or
thread, in which a wheel drives a single spindle, and is itself driven
by the hand, or by the foot acting on a treadle.

Spin"ny (?), n.; pl. Spinnies (#). [OF. espinaye,espinoye, espinei,
espanoi, F. épinaie, from L. spinetum a thicket of thorns, fr. spina a
thorn. See Spine.] A small thicket or grove with undergrowth; a clump
of trees. [Written also spinney, and spinny.]

    The downs rise steep, crowned with black fir spinnies.


C. Kingsley.

Spin"ny, a. [Cf. Spiny, a.] Thin and long; slim; slender. [Obs. or
Prov. Eng.]

Spi*nose" (?), a.[L. spinosus, from spina a thorn.] Full of spines;
armed with thorns; thorny.

Spi*nos"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being spiny or thorny;
spininess.

Spi"nous (?), a. 1. Spinose; thorny.

2. Having the form of a spine or thorn; spinelike.

Spinous process of a vertebra (Anat.), the dorsal process of the neural
arch of a vertebra; a neurapophysis.

Spi*no"zism (?), n. The form of Pantheism taught by Benedict Spinoza,
that there is but one substance, or infinite essence, in the universe,
of which the so- called material and spiritual beings and phenomena are
only modes, and that one this one substance is God. [Written also
Spinosism.]

Spi*no"zist (?), n. A believer in Spinozism.

Spin"ster (?), n. [Spin + - ster.] 1. A woman who spins, or whose
occupation is to spin.

    She spake to spinster to spin it out.


Piers Plowman.

    The spinsters and the knitters in the sun.


Shak.

2. A man who spins. [Obs.] Shak.

3. (Law) An unmarried or single woman; -- used in legal proceedings as
a title, or addition to the surname.

    If a gentlewoman be termed a spinster, she may abate the writ.


Coke.

4. A woman of evil life and character; -- so called from being forced
to spin in a house of correction. [Obs.]

Spin"stress (?), n. A woman who spins. T. Brown.

Spin"stry (?), n. The business of one who spins; spinning. [Obs.]
Milton.

Spin"ule (?), n. [L. spinula, dim. of spina a spine: cf. F. spinule.] A
minute spine. Dana.

Spin`u*les"cent (?), a. (Bot.) Having small spines; somewhat thorny.

{ Spin"u*lose` (?), Spin"u*lous (?) }, a. [Cf. F. spinuleux.] Covered
with small spines.

Spin"y (?), a. [From Spine.] 1. Full of spines; thorny; as, a spiny
tree.

2. Like a spine in shape; slender. "Spiny grasshoppers sit chirping."
Chapman.

3. Fig.: Abounding with difficulties or annoyances.

    The spiny deserts of scholastic philosophy.


Bp. Warburton.

Spiny lobster. (Zoöl.) Same as Rock lobster, under Rock. See also
Lobster.

Spin"y, n. See Spinny.

||Spi*o"de*a (?), n. pl. [NL., fr. Spio the typical genus.] (Zoöl.) An
||extensive division of marine Annelida, including those that are
||without oral tentacles or cirri, and have the gills, when present,
||mostly arranged along the sides of the body. They generally live in
||burrows or tubes.

Spi"ra*ble (?), a. [L. spirabilis.] Capable of being breathed;
respirable. [Obs.] Nash.

Spir"a*cle (?), n.[L. spiraculum, fr. spirare to breathe: cf. F.
spiracule. See Spirit.] 1. (Anat.) The nostril, or one of the nostrils,
of whales, porpoises, and allied animals.

2. (Zoöl.) (a) One of the external openings communicating with the air
tubes or tracheæ of insects, myriapods, and arachnids. They are
variable in number, and are usually situated on the sides of the thorax
and abdomen, a pair to a segment. These openings are usually
elliptical, and capable of being closed. See Illust. under Coleoptera.
(a) A tubular orifice communicating with the gill cavity of certain
ganoid and all elasmobranch fishes. It is the modified first gill
cleft.

3. Any small aperture or vent for air or other fluid.

Spi*rac"u*lar (?), a. Of or pertaining to a spiracle.

Spi*ræ"a (?), n. [L., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;, fr. &?;&?;&?; a coil.] (Bot.)
A genus of shrubs or perennial herbs including the meadowsweet and the
hardhack.

Spi*ræ"ic (?), a. (Chem.) Of, pertaining to, or derived from, the
meadowsweet (Spiræa); formerly, designating an acid which is now called
salicylic acid.

Spi"ral (?), a. [Cf. F. spiral. See Spire a winding line.] 1. Winding
or circling round a center or pole and gradually receding from it; as,
the spiral curve of a watch spring.

2. Winding round a cylinder or imaginary axis, and at the same time
rising or advancing forward; winding like the thread of a screw;
helical.

3. (Geom.) Of or pertaining to a spiral; like a spiral.

Spiral gear, or Spiral wheel (Mach.), a gear resembling in general a
spur gear, but having its teeth cut at an angle with its axis, or so
that they form small portions of screws or spirals. -- Spiral gearing,
a kind of gearing sometimes used in light machinery, in which spiral
gears, instead of bevel gears, are used to transmit motion between
shafts that are not parallel. -- Spiral operculum, an operculum whih
has spiral lines of growth. -- Spiral shell, any shell in which the
whorls form a spiral or helix. -- Spiral spring. See the Note under
Spring, n., 4.

Spi"ral (?), n. [Cf. F. spirale. See Spiral, a.] 1. (Geom.) A plane
curve, not reëntrant, described by a point, called the generatrix,
moving along a straight line according to a mathematical law, while the
line is revolving about a fixed point called the pole. Cf. Helix.

2. Anything which has a spiral form, as a spiral shell.

Equiangular spiral,a plane curve which cuts all its generatrices at the
same angle. Same as Logarithmic spiral, under Logarithmic. -- Spiral of
Archimedes, a spiral the law of which is that the generatrix moves
uniformly along the revolving line, which also moves uniformly.

Spi*ral"i*ty (?), n. The quality or states of being spiral.

Spi"ral*ly (?), adv. In a spiral form, manner, or direction.

Spi*ra`lo*zo"oid (?), n. [Spiral + zooid. So called because they often
have a spiral form when contracted.] (Zoöl.) One of the special
defensive zooids of certain hydroids. They have the form of long,
slender tentacles, and bear lasso cells.

Spi"rant (?), n. [L. spirans, -antis, p. pr. of spirare to breathe. See
Spirit.] (Phon.) A term used differently by different authorities; --
by some as equivalent to fricative, - - that is, as including all the
continuous consonants, except the nasals m, n, ng; with the further
exception, by others, of the liquids r, l, and the semivowels w, y; by
others limited to f, v, th surd and sonant, and the sound of German ch,
-- thus excluding the sibilants, as well as the nasals, liquids, and
semivowels. See Guide to Pronunciation, §§ 197-208.

Spi*ran"thy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; a coil + &?;&?;&?; flower.] (Bot.)
The occasional twisted growth of the parts of a flower.

Spi*ra"tion (?), n. [L. spiratio, fr. spirare to breathe.] The act of
breathing. [Obs.] Barrow.

Spire (?), v. i. [L. spirare to breathe. See Spirit.] To breathe.
[Obs.] Shenstone.

Spire, n. [OE. spire, spir, a blade of grass, a young shoot, AS. spr;
akin to G. spier a blade of grass, Dan. spire a sprout, sprig, Sw.
spira a spar, Icel. spra.] 1. A slender stalk or blade in vegetation;
as, a spire grass or of wheat.

    An oak cometh up a little spire.


Chaucer.

2. A tapering body that shoots up or out to a point in a conical or
pyramidal form. Specifically (Arch.), the roof of a tower when of a
pyramidal form and high in proportion to its width; also, the pyramidal
or aspiring termination of a tower which can not be said to have a
roof, such as that of Strasburg cathedral; the tapering part of a
steeple, or the steeple itself. "With glistering spires and pinnacles
adorned." Milton.

    A spire of land that stand apart, Cleft from the main.


Tennyson.

    Tall spire from which the sound of cheerful bells Just undulates
    upon the listening ear.


Cowper.

3. (Mining) A tube or fuse for communicating fire to the chargen in
blasting.

4. The top, or uppermost point, of anything; the summit.

    The spire and top of praises.


Shak.

Spire, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Spired (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spiring.] To
shoot forth, or up in, or as if in, a spire. Emerson.

    It is not so apt to spire up as the other sorts, being more
    inclined to branch into arms.


Mortimer.

Spire, n. [L. spira coil, twist; akin to Gr. &?;&?;&?;: cf. F. spire.]
1. A spiral; a curl; a whorl; a twist. Dryden.

2. (Geom.) The part of a spiral generated in one revolution of the
straight line about the pole. See Spiral, n.

Spire bearer. (Paleon.) Same as Spirifer.

Spired (?), a. Having a spire; being in the form of a spire; as, a
spired steeple. Mason.

Spi"ri*cle (?), n. [Dim., fr. L. spira a coil.] (Bot.) One of certain
minute coiled threads in the coating of some seeds. When moistened
these threads protrude in great numbers. Gray.

Spi"ri*fer (?), n. [NL., fr. L. spira a coil + ferreto bear.] (Paleon.)
Any one of numerous species of fossil brachipods of the genus Spirifer,
or Delthyris, and allied genera, in which the long calcareous supports
of the arms form a large spiral, or helix, on each side.

||Spi*ril"lum (?), n. [NL., dim. of L. spira a coil.] (Biol.) A genus
||of common motile microörganisms (Spirobacteria) having the form of
||spiral- shaped filaments. One species is said to be the cause of
||relapsing fever.

Spir"ing (?), a. Shooting up in a spire or spires. "The spiring grass."
Dryton.

Spir"it (?), n. [OF. espirit, esperit, F. esprit, L. spiritus, from
spirare to breathe, to blow. Cf. Conspire, Expire, Esprit, Sprite.] 1.
Air set in motion by breathing; breath; hence, sometimes, life itself.
[Obs.] "All of spirit would deprive." Spenser.

    The mild air, with season moderate, Gently attempered, and disposed
    eo well, That still it breathed foorth sweet spirit.


Spenser.

2. A rough breathing; an aspirate, as the letter h; also, a mark to
denote aspiration; a breathing. [Obs.]

    Be it a letter or spirit, we have great use for it.


B. Jonson.

3. Life, or living substance, considered independently of corporeal
existence; an intelligence conceived of apart from any physical
organization or embodiment; vital essence, force, or energy, as
distinct from matter.

4. The intelligent, immaterial and immortal part of man; the soul, in
distinction from the body in which it resides; the agent or subject of
vital and spiritual functions, whether spiritual or material.

    There is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almighty
    giveth them understanding.


Job xxxii. 8.

    As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
    dead also.


James ii. 26.

    Spirit is a substance wherein thinking, knowing, doubting, and a
    power of moving, do subsist.


Locke.

5. Specifically, a disembodied soul; the human soul after it has left
the body.

    Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
    shall return unto God who gave it.


Eccl. xii. 7.

    Ye gentle spirits far away, With whom we shared the cup of grace.


Keble.

6. Any supernatural being, good or bad; an apparition; a specter; a
ghost; also, sometimes, a sprite,; a fairy; an elf.

    Whilst young, preserve his tender mind from all impressions of
    spirits and goblins in the dark.


Locke.

7. Energy, vivacity, ardor, enthusiasm, courage, etc.

    "Write it then, quickly," replied Bede; and summoning all his
    spirits together, like the last blaze of a candle going out, he
    indited it, and expired.


Fuller.

8. One who is vivacious or lively; one who evinces great activity or
peculiar characteristics of mind or temper; as, a ruling spirit; a
schismatic spirit.

    Such spirits as he desired to please, such would I choose for my
    judges.


Dryden.

9. Temper or disposition of mind; mental condition or disposition;
intellectual or moral state; -- often in the plural; as, to be
cheerful, or in good spirits; to be downhearted, or in bad spirits.

    God has . . . made a spirit of building succeed a spirit of pulling
    down.


South.

    A perfect judge will read each work of wit With the same spirit
    that its author writ.


Pope.

10. Intent; real meaning; -- opposed to the letter, or to formal
statement; also, characteristic quality, especially such as is derived
from the individual genius or the personal character; as, the spirit of
an enterprise, of a document, or the like.

11. Tenuous, volatile, airy, or vapory substance, possessed of active
qualities.

    All bodies have spirits . . . within them.


Bacon.

12. Any liquid produced by distillation; especially, alcohol, the
spirits, or spirit, of wine (it having been first distilled from wine):
-- often in the plural.

13. pl. Rum, whisky, brandy, gin, and other distilled liquors having
much alcohol, in distinction from wine and malt liquors.

14. (Med.) A solution in alcohol of a volatile principle. Cf. Tincture.
U. S. Disp.

15. (Alchemy) Any one of the four substances, sulphur, sal ammoniac,
quicksilver, or arsenic (or, according to some, orpiment).

    The four spirits and the bodies seven.


Chaucer.

16. (Dyeing) Stannic chloride. See under Stannic.

Spirit is sometimes joined with other words, forming compounds,
generally of obvious signification; as, spirit- moving,
spirit-searching, spirit-stirring, etc.

Astral spirits, Familiar spirits, etc. See under Astral, Familiar, etc.
-- Animal spirits. (a) (Physiol.) The fluid which at one time was
supposed to circulate through the nerves and was regarded as the agent
of sensation and motion; -- called also the nervous fluid, or nervous
principle. (b) Physical health and energy; frolicsomeness;
sportiveness. -- Ardent spirits, strong alcoholic liquors, as brandy,
rum, whisky, etc., obtained by distillation. -- Holy Spirit, or The
Spirit (Theol.), the Spirit of God, or the third person of the Trinity;
the Holy Ghost. The spirit also signifies the human spirit as
influenced or animated by the Divine Spirit. -- Proof spirit. (Chem.)
See under Proof. -- Rectified spirit (Chem.), spirit rendered purer or
more concentrated by redistillation, so as to increase the percentage
of absolute alcohol. -- Spirit butterfly (Zoöl.), any one of numerous
species of delicate butterflies of tropical America belonging to the
genus Ithomia. The wings are gauzy and nearly destitute of scales. --
Spirit duck. (Zoöl.) (a) The buffle-headed duck. (b) The golden-eye. --
Spirit lamp (Art), a lamp in which alcohol or methylated spirit is
burned. -- Spirit level. See under Level. -- Spirit of hartshorn. (Old
Chem.) See under Hartshorn. -- Spirit of Mindererus (Med.), an aqueous
solution of acetate of ammonium; -- named after R. Minderer, physician
of Augsburg. -- Spirit of nitrous ether (Med. Chem.), a pale yellow
liquid, of a sweetish taste and a pleasant ethereal odor. It is
obtained by the distillation of alcohol with nitric and sulphuric
acids, and consists essentially of ethyl nitrite with a little acetic
aldehyde. It is used as a diaphoretic, diuretic, antispasmodic, etc.
Called also sweet spirit of niter. -- Spirit of salt (Chem.),
hydrochloric acid; -- so called because obtained from salt and
sulphuric acid. [Obs.] -- Spirit of sense, the utmost refinement of
sensation. [Obs.] Shak. -- Spirits, or Spirit, of turpentine (Chem.),
rectified oil of turpentine, a transparent, colorless, volatile, and
very inflammable liquid, distilled from the turpentine of the various
species of pine; camphine. See Camphine. -- Spirit of vitriol (Chem.),
sulphuric acid; -- so called because formerly obtained by the
distillation of green vitriol. [Obs.] -- Spirit of vitriolic ether
(Chem.) ether; -- often but incorrectly called sulphuric ether. See
Ether. [Obs.] -- Spirits, or Spirit, of wine (Chem.), alcohol; -- so
called because formerly obtained by the distillation of wine. -- Spirit
rapper, one who practices spirit rapping; a "medium" so called. --
Spirit rapping, an alleged form of communication with the spirits of
the dead by raps. See Spiritualism, 3. -- Sweet spirit of niter. See
Spirit of nitrous ether, above.

<! p. 1388 !>

Syn. -- Life; ardor; energy; fire; courage; animatioon; cheerfulness;
vivacity; enterprise.

Spir"it (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spirited; p. pr. & vb. n. Spiriting.]
1. To animate with vigor; to excite; to encourage; to inspirit; as,
civil dissensions often spirit the ambition of private men; --
sometimes followed by up.

    Many officers and private men spirit up and assist those obstinate
    people to continue in their rebellion.


Swift.

2. To convey rapidly and secretly, or mysteriously, as if by the agency
of a spirit; to kidnap; -- often with away, or off.

    The ministry had him spirited away, and carried abroad as a
    dangerous person.


Arbuthnot & Pope.

    I felt as if I had been spirited into some castle of antiquity.


Willis.

Spiriting away (Law), causing to leave; the offense of inducing a
witness to leave a jurisdiction so as to evade process requiring
attendance at trial.

Spir"it*al*ly (?), adv.[L. spiritalis belonging to breathing.] By means
of the breath. [Obs.] Holder.

Spir"it*ed, a. 1. Animated or possessed by a spirit. [Obs.] "So talked
the spirited, sly snake." Milton.

2. Animated; full of life or vigor; lively; full of spirit or fire; as,
a spirited oration; a spirited answer.

Spirited is much used in composition; as in high- spirited,
low-spirited, mean-spirited, etc.

Syn. -- Lively; vivacious; animated; ardent; active; bold; courageous.

-- Spir"it*ed*ly, adv. -- Spir"it*ed*ness, n.

Spir"it*ful (?), a. Full of spirit; spirited. [R.]

    The spiritful and orderly life of our own grown men.


Milton.

-- Spir"it*ful*ly, adv. -- Spir"it*ful*ness, n.

Spir"it*ism (?), n. Spiritualsm.

Spir"it*ist, n. A spiritualist.

Spir"it*less, a. 1. Destitute of spirit; wanting animation; wanting
cheerfulness; dejected; depressed.

2. Destitute of vigor; wanting life, courage, or fire.

    A men so faint, so spiritless, So dull, so dead in lock, so
    woebegone.


Shak.

3. Having no breath; extinct; dead. "The spiritless body." Greenhill.

-- Spir"it*less*ly, adv. -- Spir"it*less*ness, n.

||Spi`ri*to"so (?), a. & adv. [It.] (Mus.) Spirited; spiritedly; -- a
||direction to perform a passage in an animated, lively manner.

Spir"it*ous (?), a. [Cf. Spirituous.] 1. Like spirit; refined;
defecated; pure. [R.]

    More refined, more spirituous and pure.


Milton.

2. Ardent; active. [R.]

Spir"it*ous*ness, n. Quality of being spiritous. [R.]

Spir"it*u*al (?), a. [L. spiritualis: cf. F. spirituel. See Spirit.] 1.
Consisting of spirit; not material; incorporeal; as, a spiritual
substance or being.

    It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.


1 Cor. xv. 44.

2. Of or pertaining to the intellectual and higher endowments of the
mind; mental; intellectual.

3. Of or pertaining to the moral feelings or states of the soul, as
distinguished from the external actions; reaching and affecting the
spirits.

    God's law is spiritual; it is a transcript of the divine nature,
    and extends its authority to the acts of the soul of man.


Sir T. Browne.

4. Of or pertaining to the soul or its affections as influenced by the
Spirit; controlled and inspired by the divine Spirit; proceeding from
the Holy Spirit; pure; holy; divine; heavenly-minded; -- opposed to
carnal.

    That I may impart unto you some spiritual gift.


Rom. i. ll.

    Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath
    blessed us with all spiritual blessings.


Eph. i. 3.

    If a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore
    such an one.


Gal. vi. 1.

5. Not lay or temporal; relating to sacred things; ecclesiastical; as,
the spiritual functions of the clergy; lords spiritual and temporal; a
spiritual corporation.

Spiritual coadjuctor. (Eccl.) See the Note under Jesuit. -- Spiritual
court (Eccl. Law), an ecclesiastical court, or a court having
jurisdiction in ecclesiastical affairs; a court held by a bishop or
other ecclesiastic.

Spir"it*u*al, n. A spiritual function, office, or affair. See
Spirituality, 2.

    He assigns supremacy to the pope in spirituals, and to the emperor
    in temporals.


Lowell.

Spir"it*u*al*ism (?), n. 1. The quality or state of being spiritual.

2. (Physiol.) The doctrine, in opposition to the materialists, that all
which exists is spirit, or soul -- that what is called the external
world is either a succession of notions impressed on the mind by the
Deity, as maintained by Berkeley, or else the mere educt of the mind
itself, as taught by Fichte.

3. A belief that departed spirits hold intercourse with mortals by
means of physical phenomena, as by rappng, or during abnormal mental
states, as in trances, or the like, commonly manifested through a
person of special susceptibility, called a medium; spiritism; the
doctrines and practices of spiritualists.

    What is called spiritualism should, I think, be called a mental
    species of materialism.


R. H. Hutton.

Spir"it*u*al*ist (?), n. 1. One who professes a regard for spiritual
things only; one whose employment is of a spiritual character; an
ecclesiastic.

2. One who maintains the doctrine of spiritualism.

3. One who believes in direct intercourse with departed spirits,
through the agency of persons commonly called mediums, by means of
physical phenomena; one who attempts to maintain such intercourse; a
spiritist.

Spir"it*u*al*ist, a. Spiritualistic. Taylor.

Spir`it*u*al*is"tic (?), a. Relating to, or connected with,
spiritualism.

Spir`it*u*al"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Spiritualities (#). [L. spiritualitas:
cf. F. spiritualité.] 1. The quality or state of being spiritual;
incorporeality; heavenly- mindedness.

    A pleasure made for the soul, suitable to its spirituality.


South.

    If this light be not spiritual, yet it approacheth nearest to
    spirituality.


Sir W. Raleigh.

    Much of our spirituality and comfort in public worship depends on
    the state of mind in which we come.


Bickersteth.

2. (Eccl.) That which belongs to the church, or to a person as an
ecclesiastic, or to religion, as distinct from temporalities.

    During the vacancy of a see, the archbishop is guardian of the
    spiritualities thereof.


Blackstone.

3. An ecclesiastical body; the whole body of the clergy, as distinct
from, or opposed to, the temporality. [Obs.]

    Five entire subsidies were granted to the king by the spirituality.


Fuller.

Spir`it*u*al*i*za"tion (?), n. The act of spiritualizing, or the state
of being spiritualized.

Spir"it*u*al*ize (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spiritualized (?); p. pr. &
vb. n. Spiritualizing (?).] [Cf. F. spiritualiser.] 1. To refine
intellectiually or morally; to purify from the corrupting influence of
the world; to give a spiritual character or tendency to; as, to
spiritualize soul.

    This seen in the clear air, and the whole spiritualized by endless
    recollections, fills the eye and the heart more forcibly than I can
    find words to say.


Carlyle.

2. To give a spiritual meaning to; to take in a spiritual sense; --
opposed to literalize.

3. (Old Chem.) To extract spirit from; also, to convert into, or
impregnate with, spirit.

Spir"it*u*al*i`zer (?), n. One who spiritualizes.

Spir"it*u*al*ly, adv. In a spiritual manner; with purity of spirit;
like a spirit.

Spir"it*u*al-mind`ed (?), a. Having the mind set on spiritual things,
or filled with holy desires and affections. --
Spir"it*u*al-mind`ed*ness, n.

Spir"it*u*al*ness, n. The quality or state of being spiritual or
spiritual-minded; spirituality.

Spir"it*u*al*ty (?), n. [See Spirituality.] (Eccl.) An ecclesiastical
body; a spirituality. Shak.

||Spi`ri`tu`elle" (?), a. [F.] Of the nature, or having the appearance,
||of a spirit; pure; refined; ethereal.

Spir`it*u*os"i*ty (?), n. The quality or state of being spirituous;
spirituousness. [R.]

Spir"it*u*ous (?), a. [Cf. (for sense 2) F. spiritueux. Cf. Spiritous.]
1. Having the quality of spirit; tenuous in substance, and having
active powers or properties; ethereal; immaterial; spiritual; pure.

2. Containing, or of the nature of, alcoholic (esp. distilled) spirit;
consisting of refined spirit; alcoholic; ardent; as, spirituous
liquors.

3. Lively; gay; vivid; airy. [Obs.] Sir H. Wotton.

    The mind of man is of that spirituous, stirring nature, that it is
    perpetually at work.


South.

Spir"it*u*ous*ness, n. The quality or state of being spirituous. [R.]
Boyle.

Spirk"et*ing (?), n. (Naut.) The planking from the waterways up to the
port sills. Totten.

Spirl"ing (?), n. Sparling. [Prov. Eng.]

||Spi`ro*bac*te"ri*a (?), n. pl.; sing. Spirobacterium (&?;). [NL. See
||4th Spire, and Bacterium.] (Biol.) See the Note under Microbacteria.

{ ||Spi`ro*chæ"ta (?), ||Spi`ro*chæ"te (?), } n. [L. spira a coil + Gr.
&?;&?;&?; hair.] (Biol.) A genus of Spirobacteria similar to Spirillum,
but distinguished by its motility. One species, the Spirochæte
Obermeyeri, is supposed to be the cause of relapsing fever.

Spi"ro*graph (?), n. [L. spirare to breathe + -graph.] (Physiol.) An
instrument for recording the respiratory movements, as the sphygmograph
does those of the pulse.

Spi*rom"e*ter (?), n. [L. spirare to breathe + -meter.] An instrument
for measuring the vital capacity of the lungs, or the volume of air
which can be expelled from the chest after the deepest possible
inspiration. Cf. Pneumatometer.

Spi*rom"e*try (?), n. The act or process of measuring the chest
capacity by means of a spirometer.

Spi"ro*scope (?), n. [L. spirare to breathe + -scope.] (Physiol.) A wet
meter used to determine the breathing capacity of the lungs.

{ Spi*royl"ic (?), Spi*royl"ous (?), } a. [NL. Spir&?; meadowsweet (a
source of salicylal) + -yl + -ic, -ous.] (Chem.) Pertaining to, or
designating, a substance now called salicylal. [Obs.]

Spirt (?), v. & n. Same as Spurt.

Spir"tle (?), v. t. To spirt in a scattering manner.

||Spir"u*la (?), n. [NL., dim. of L. spira a coil.] (Zoöl.) A genus of
||cephalopods having a multilocular, internal, siphunculated shell in
||the form of a flat spiral, the coils of which are not in contact.

Spir"u*late (?), n. (Zoöl.) Having the color spots, or structural
parts, arranged spirally.

Spir"y (?), a. [From Spire a winding line.] Of a spiral form; wreathed;
curled; serpentine.

    Hid in the spiry volumes of the snake.


Dryden.

Spir"y, a. [FR. Spire a steeple.] Of or pertaining to a spire; like a
spire, tall, slender, and tapering; abounding in spires; as, spiry
turrets. "Spiry towns." Thomson.

Spiss (?), a. [L. spissus.] Thick; crowded; compact; dense. [Obs.]

    This spiss and . . . copious, yet concise, treatise.


Brerewood.

Spis"sa*ted (?), a. Rendered dense or compact, as by evaporation;
inspissated; thickened. [R.]

    The spissated juice of the poppy.


Bp. Warburton.

Spis"si*tude (?), n. [L. spissitudo.] The quality or state of being
spissated; as, the spissitude of coagulated blood, or of any coagulum.
Arbuthnot.

Spit (?), n. [OE. spite, AS. spitu; akin to D. spit, G. spiess, OHG.
spiz, Dan. spid. Sw. spett, and to G. spitz pointed. &radic;170.] 1. A
long, slender, pointed rod, usually of iron, for holding meat while
roasting.

2. A small point of land running into the sea, or a long, narrow shoal
extending from the shore into the sea; as, a spit of sand. Cook.

3. The depth to which a spade goes in digging; a spade; a spadeful.
[Prov. Eng.] Halliwell.

Spit, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spitted; p. pr. & vb. n. Spitting.] [From
Spit, n.; cf. Speet.] 1. To thrust a spit through; to fix upon a spit;
hence, to thrust through or impale; as, to spit a loin of veal.
"Infants spitted upon pikes." Shak.

2. To spade; to dig. [Prov. Eng.]

Spit, v. i. To attend to a spit; to use a spit. [Obs.]

    She's spitting in the kitchen.


Old Play.

Spit, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spit (Spat, archaic); p. pr. & vb. n.
Spitting.] [AS. spittan; akin to G. spützen, Dan. spytte, Sw.
spotta,Icel. sp&?;ta, and prob. E. spew. The past tense spat is due to
AS. sp&?;tte, from sp&?;tan to spit. Cf. Spat, n., Spew, Spawl, Spot,
n.] 1. To eject from the mouth; to throw out, as saliva or other
matter, from the mouth. "Thus spit I out my venom." Chaucer.

2. To eject; to throw out; to belch.

Spitted was sometimes used as the preterit and the past participle. "He
. . . shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on." Luke
xviii. 32.

Spit, n. The secretion formed by the glands of the mouth; spitle;
saliva; sputum.

Spit, v. i. 1. To throw out saliva from the mouth.

2. To rain or snow slightly, or with sprinkles.

    It had been spitting with rain.


Dickens.

To spit on or upon, to insult grossly; to treat with contempt.
"Spitting upon all antiquity." South.

Spit"al (?), n. [Abbreviated from hospital.] [Written also spittle.] A
hospital. [Obs.] Shak.

Spit"al*house` (?), n. A hospital. [Obs.]

Spit"ball` (?), n. Paper chewed, and rolled into a ball, to be thrown
as a missile.

Spit"box` (?), n. A vessel to receive spittle.

Spitch"cock` (?), v. t. [1st spit + cock.] (Cookery) To split (as an
eel) lengthwise, and broil it, or fry it in hot fat.

Spitch"cock`, n. (Cookery) An eel split and broiled.

Spitch"cocked` (?), a. (Cookery) Broiled or fried after being split
lengthwise; -- said of eels.

Spit" curl` (?). A little lock of hair, plastered in a spiral form on
the temple or forehead with spittle, or other adhesive substance.
[Colloq.]

Spite (?), n. [Abbreviated fr. despite.] 1. Ill-will or hatred toward
another, accompanied with the disposition to irritate, annoy, or
thwart; petty malice; grudge; rancor; despite. Pope.

    This is the deadly spite that angers.


Shak.

2. Vexation; chargrin; mortification. [R.] Shak.

In spite of, or Spite of, in opposition to all efforts of; in defiance
or contempt of; notwithstanding. "Continuing, spite of pain, to use a
knee after it had been slightly ibnjured." H. Spenser. "And saved me in
spite of the world, the devil, and myself." South. "In spite of all
applications, the patient grew worse every day." Arbuthnot. See Syn.
under Notwithstanding. -- To owe one a spite, to entertain a mean
hatred for him.

Syn. -- Pique, rancor; malevolence; grudge. -- Spite, Malice. Malice
has more reference to the disposition, and spite to the manifestation
of it in words and actions. It is, therefore, meaner than malice,
thought not always more criminal. " Malice . . . is more frequently
employed to express the dispositions of inferior minds to execute every
purpose of mischief within the more limited circle of their abilities."
Cogan. "Consider eke, that spite availeth naught." Wyatt. See Pique.

Spite, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spited; p. pr. & vb. n. Spiting.] 1. To be
angry at; to hate. [Obs.]

    The Danes, then . . . pagans, spited places of religion.


Fuller.

2. To treat maliciously; to try to injure or thwart.

3. To fill with spite; to offend; to vex. [R.]

    Darius, spited at the Magi, endeavored to abolish not only their
    learning, but their language.


Sir. W. Temple.

<! p. 1389 !>

Spite"ful (?), a. Filled with, or showing, spite; having a desire to
vex, annoy, or injure; malignant; malicious; as, a spiteful person or
act. Shak. -- Spite"ful*ly, adv. Spite"ful*ness, n.

Spit"fire` (?), n. A violent, irascible, or passionate person.
[Colloq.] Grose.

Spit"ful (?), n.; pl. Spitfuls (&?;). A spadeful. [Prov. Eng.]

Spit"ous (?), a. Having spite; spiteful. [Obs.]

Spit"ous*ly, adv. Spitefully. [Obs.] Chaucer.

Spits"cocked` (?), a. Spitchcocked.

Spit"ted (?), a. [From Spit.] 1. Put upon a spit; pierced as if by a
spit.

2. Shot out long; -- said of antlers. Bacon.

Spit"ted, p. p. of Spit, v. i., to eject, to spit. [Obs.]

Spit"ter (?), n. [See Spit to eject from the mouth.] One who ejects
saliva from the mouth.

Spit"ter, n. [See Spit an iron prong.] 1. One who puts meat on a spit.

2. (Zoöl.) A young deer whose antlers begin to shoot or become sharp; a
brocket, or pricket.

Spit"tle (?), n. See Spital. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Spit"tle, v. t. [See Spit to spade.] To dig or stir with a small spade.
[Prov. Eng.]

Spit"tle, n. A small sort of spade. [Prov. Eng.]

Spit"tle, n. [From Spit to eject from the mouth: cf. Spattle, and AS.
sptl.] The thick, moist matter which is secreted by the salivary
glands; saliva; spit.

Spittle insect. (Zoöl.) See Cuckoo spit (b), under Cuckoo.

Spit"tly (?), a. Like spittle; slimy. [Obs.]

Spit*toon" (?), n. A spitbox; a cuspidor.

Spit"-ven"om (?), n. Poison spittle; poison ejected from the mouth.
[R.] Hooker.

Spitz" dog" (?). [G. spitz, spitzhund.] (Zoöl.) A breed of dogs having
erect ears and long silky hair, usually white; -- called also
Pomeranian dog, and louploup.

Spitz"en*burgh (?), n. A kind of red and yellow apple, of medium size
and spicy flavor. It originated at Newtown, on Long Island.

||Splanch`napoph"y*sis (?), n.; pl. Splanchnapophyses (#). [NL. See
||Splanchnic, and Apophysis.] (Anat.) Any element of the skeleton in
||relation with the alimentary canal, as the jaws and hyoidean
||apparatus. -- Splanch`nap`o*phys"i*al (#), a.  Mivart.

Splanch"nic (?), a. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; an entrail.] (Anat.) Of or
pertaining to the viscera; visceral.

Splanch*nog"ra*phy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; an entrail + -graphy.]
Splanchnology.

Splanch*nol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; an entrail + -logy.] That
part of anatomy which treats of the viscera; also, a treatise on the
viscera.

Splanch"no*pleure (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; an entrail + &?;&?;&?;&?;
side.] (Anat.) The inner, or visceral, one of the two lamellæ into
which the vertebrate blastoderm divides on either side of the
notochord, and from which the walls of the enteric canal and the
umbilical vesicle are developed. See Somatopleure.

-- Splanch`no*pleu"ric (#), a.

Splanch`no-skel"e*ton (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; an entrail + E.
skeleton.] (Anat.) That part of the skeleton connected with the sense
organs and the viscera. Owen.

Splanch*not"o*my (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;&?; an entrail + &?;&?;&?;&?;
to cut.] The dissection, or anatomy, of the viscera.

Splan"drel (?), n. See Spandrel. [R.]

Splash (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Splashed (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Splashing.] [Akin to plash.] 1. To strike and dash about, as water,
mud, etc.; to plash.

2. To spatter water, mud, etc., upon; to wet.

Splash, v. i. To strike and dash about water, mud, etc.; to dash in
such a way as to spatter.

Splash, n. 1. Water, or water and dirt, thrown upon anything, or thrown
from a puddle or the like; also, a spot or daub, as of matter which
wets or disfigures.

2. A noise made by striking upon or in a liquid.

Splash"board` (?), n. A guard in the front part of vehicle, to prevent
splashing by a mud or water from the horse's heels; -- in the United
States commonly called dashboard.

Splash"er (?), n. 1. One who, or that which, splashes.

2. One of the guarde over the wheels, as of a carriage, locomotive,
etc. Weale.

3. A guard to keep off splashes from anything.

Splash"y (?), a. Full of dirty water; wet and muddy, so as be easily
splashed about; slushy.

Splat"ter (?), v. i. & t. To spatter; to splash.

Splat"ter*dash` (?), n . Uproar. Jamieson.

Splay (?), v. t. [Abbrev. of display.] 1. To display; to spread. [Obs.]
"Our ensigns splayed." Gascoigne.

2. To dislocate, as a shoulder bone.

3. To spay; to castrate. [Obs. or Prov. Eng.]

4. To turn on one side; to render oblique; to slope or slant, as the
side of a door, window, etc. Oxf. Gloss.

Splay, a. Displayed; spread out; turned outward; hence, flat; ungainly;
as, splay shoulders.

    Sonwthing splay, something blunt-edged, unhandy, and infelicitous.


M. Arnold.

Splay, a. (Arch.) A slope or bevel, especially of the sides of a door
or window, by which the opening is made larged at one face of the wall
than at the other, or larger at each of the faces than it is between
them.

Splay"foot` (?), n.; pl. Splayfeet (&?;). A foot that is abnormally
flattened and spread out; flat foot.

{ Splay"foot`, Splay"foot`ed } a. Having a splayfoot or splayfeet.

Splay"mouth` (?), n.; pl. Splaymouths (&?;). A wide mouth; a mouth
stretched in derision. Dryden.

Splay`mouthed" (?), a. Having a splaymouth. T. Brown.

Spleen (?), n. [L. splen, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; the milt or spleen,
affection of the spleen; cf. L. lien, plihan, plhan.] 1. (Anat.) A
peculiar glandlike but ductless organ found near the stomach or
intestine of most vertebrates and connected with the vascular system;
the milt. Its exact function in not known.

2. Anger; latent spite; ill humor; malice; as, to vent one's spleen.

    In noble minds some dregs remain, Not yet purged off, of spleen and
    sour disdain.


Pope.

3. A fit of anger; choler. Shak.

4. A sudden motion or action; a fit; a freak; a whim. [Obs. or R.]

    A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways.


Shak.

5. Melancholy; hypochondriacal affections.

    Bodies changed to various forms by spleen.


Pope.

    There is a luxury in self-dispraise: And inward self-disparagement
    affords To meditative spleen a grateful feast.


Wordsworth.

6. A fit of immoderate laughter or merriment. [Obs.]

    Thy silly thought enforces my spleen.


Shak.

Spleen, v. t. To dislke. [Obs.] Bp. Hacket.

Spleened (?), a. 1. Deprived of the spleen.

2. Angered; annoyed. [Obs.] R. North.

Spleen"ful (?), a. Displaying, or affected with, spleen; angry;
fretful; melancholy.

    Myself have calmed their spleenful mutiny.


Shak.

    Then rode Geraint, a little spleenful yet, Across the bridge that
    spann'd the dry ravine.


Tennyson.

Spleen"ish, a. Spleeny; affected with spleen; fretful. --
Spleen"ish*ly, adv. -- Spleen"ish*ness, n.

Spleen"less, a. Having no spleen; hence, kind; gentle; mild. [Obs.]
Chapman.

Spleen"wort` (?), n. [Spleen + wort; cf. L. splenium, asplenium, Gr.
&?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;&?;, &?;&?;&?;. ] (Bot.) Any fern of the genus
Asplenium, some species of which were anciently used as remedies for
disorders of the spleen.

Spleen"y (?), a. 1. Irritable; peevish; fretful.

    Spleeny Lutheran, and not wholesome to Our cause.


Shak.

2. Affected with nervous complaints; melancholy.

Spleg"et (?), n. [Cf. Pledget.] (Med.) A cloth dipped in a liquid for
washing a sore. Crabb.

||Sple*nal"gi*a (?), n. [NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?; spleen + &?;&?;&?;
||pain.] (Med.) Pain over the region of the spleen.

||Splen"cu*lus (?), n.; pl. Splenculi (#). [NL., dim. of L. splen.]
||(Anat.) A lienculus.

Splen"dent (?), a. [L. splendens, -entis, p. pr. of splendere to
shine.] 1. Shining; glossy; beaming with light; lustrous; as, splendent
planets; splendent metals. See the Note under 3d Luster, 4.

2. Very conspicuous; illustrious. "Great and splendent fortunes." Sir
H. Wotton.

Splen"did (?), a. [L. splendidus, fr. splendere shine; cf. Lith.
splendëti: cf. F. splendide.] 1. Possessing or displaying splendor;
shining; very bright; as, a splendid sun.

2. Showy; magnificent; sumptuous; pompous; as, a splendid palace; a
splendid procession or pageant.

3. Illustrious; heroic; brilliant; celebrated; famous; as, a splendid
victory or reputation.

Splen*did"i*ous (?), a. Splendid. [Obs.]

Splen"did*ly (?), adv. In a splendid manner; magnificently.

Splen"did*ness, n. The quality of being splendid.

Splen"did*ous (?), a. Splendid. [Obs.] B. Jonson.

Splen*dif"er*ous (?), a. Splendor- bearing; splendid. Bale (1538). "A
splendiferous woman." Haliburton. [Now used humorously.]

Splen"dor (?), n.[L. fr. splendere to shine: cf. F. splendeur.] 1.
Great brightness; brilliant luster; brilliancy; as, the splendor ot the
sun. B. Jonson.

2. Magnifience; pomp; parade; as, the splendor of equipage, ceremonies,
processions, and the like. "Rejoice in splendor of mine own." Shak.

3. Brilliancy; glory; as, the splendor of a victory.

Syn. -- Luster; brilliancy; magnifience; gorgeousness; display;
showiness; pomp; parade; grandeur.

{ Splen"drous (?), Splen"dor*ous (?) }, a. Splendid. Drayton.

Splen"e*tic (?), a. [L. spleneticus: cf. F. splénétique. See Spleen.]
Affected with spleen; malicious; spiteful; peevish; fretful. "Splenetic
guffaw." G. Eliot.

    You humor me when I am sick; Why not when I am splenetic?


Pope.

Syn. -- Morese; gloomy; sullen; peevish; fretful.

Splen"e*tic, n. A person affected with spleen.

Sple*net"ic*al (?), a. Splenetic.

Sple*net"ic*al*ly, adv. In a splenetical manner.

Sple"ni*al (?), a. [L. splenium a plaster, a patch, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a
bandage.] (Anat.) (a) Designating the splenial bone. (b) Of or
pertaining to the splenial bone or splenius muscle.

Splenial bone (Anat.), a thin splintlike bone on the inner side of the
proximal portion of the mandible of many vertebrates.

Sple"ni*al, n. (Anat.) The splenial bone.

Splen"ic (?), a. [L. splenicus, Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?;; cf. F. splénique.]
(Anat.) Of or pertaining to the spleen; lienal; as, the splenic vein.

Splenic apoplexy or fever. (Med.) See Anthrax, n., 3.

Splen"ic*al (?), a. Splenic.

Splen"ish, a. Spleenish. [Obs.] Drayton.

||Sple*ni"tis (?), n.[NL., fr. Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; of the spleen.] (Med.)
||Inflammation of the spleen.

Splen"i*tive (?), a. Splenetic. Shak.

    Even and smooth as seemed the temperament of the nonchalant,
    languid Virginian -- not splenitive or rash.


T. N. Page.

||Sple"ni*um (?), n.[L., a plaster, a patch, from Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; a
||bandage, compress.] (Anat.) The thickened posterior border of the
||corpus callosum; -- so called in allusion to its shape.

||Sple"ni*us (?), n. [NL.] (Anat.) A flat muscle of the back of the
||neck.

Splen`i*za"tion (?), n. (Med.) A morbid state of the lung produced by
inflammation, in which its tissue resembles that of the spleen.

Splen"o*cele (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?;&?; spleen + &?;&?;&?; a tumor.]
(Med.) Hernia formed by the spleen.

Sple*nog"ra*phy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; spleen + -graphy.] A description
of the spleen.

Sple"noid (?), a.[Gr. &?;&?;&?; spleeen + -oid.] (Anat.) Resembling the
spleen; spleenlike.

Sple*nol"o*gy (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; spleen + -logy.] The branch of
science which treats of the spleen.

Sple*not"o*my (?), n. [Gr. &?;&?;&?; spleen + &?;&?;&?; to cut.] (a)
(Anat.) Dissection or anatomy of the spleen. (b) (Med.) An incision
into the spleen; removal of the spleen by incision.

Splent (?), n. 1. See Splent.

2. See Splent coal, below.

Splent coal, an inferior kind of cannel coal from Scotch collieries; --
called also splent, splint, and splint coal.

Spleu"chan (?), n. [Gael. spliuchan.] A pouch, as for tobacco. [Scot.]
Sir W. Scott.

Splice (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spliced (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Splicing
(?).] [D. splitsen, splitten; akin to G. splissen, Sw. splissa, Dan.
splisse, and E. split; -- from the dividing or splitting the ends into
separate strands. See Split, v. t.] 1. To unite, as two ropes, or parts
of a rope, by a particular manner of interweaving the strands, -- the
union being between two ends, or between an end and the body of a rope.

2. To unite, as spars, timbers, rails, etc., by lapping the two ends
together, or by applying a piece which laps upon the two ends, and then
binding, or in any way making fast.

3. To unite in marrige. [Slang]

Splice grafting.ee under Grafting. -- To splice the main brace (Naut.),
to give out, or drink, an extra allowance of spirits on occasion of
special exposure to wet or cold, or to severe fatigue; hence, to take a
dram.

Splice, n. A junction or joining made by splicing.

Spline (?), n. 1. A rectangular piece fitting grooves like key seats in
a hub and a shaft, so that while the one may slide endwise on the
other, both must revolve together; a feather; also, sometimes, a groove
to receive such a rectangular piece.

2. A long, flexble piece of wood sometimes used as a ruler.

Splin"ing, a. Of or pertaining to a spline.

Splining machine, a machine tool for cutting grooves, key seats, or
slots; a slotting machine.

Splint (?), n. [Akin to D. splinter,G. splinter, splitter, Dan. splint,
Sw. splint a kind of spike, a forelock (in nautical use), Sw. splintato
splint, splinter, Dan. splinte, and E. split. See Split, v. t., and cf.
Splent.] 1. A piece split off; a splinter.

2. (Surg.) A thin piece of wood, or other substance, used to keep in
place, or protect, an injured part, especially a broken bone when set.

3. (Anat.) A splint bone.

4. (Far.) A disease affecting the splint bones, as a callosity or hard
excrescence.

5. (Anc. Armor.) One of the small plates of metal used in making splint
armor. See Splint armor, below.

    The knees and feet were defended by splints, or thin plates of
    steel.


Sir. W. Scott.

6. Splint, or splent, coal. See Splent coal, under Splent.

Splint armor,a kind of ancient armor formed of thin plates of metal,
usually overlapping each other and allowing the limbs to move freely.
-- Splint bone (Anat.), one of the rudimentary, splintlike metacarpal
or metatarsal bones on either side of the cannon bone in the limbs of
the horse and allied animals. -- Splint coal. See Splent coal, under
Splent.

Splint, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Splinted; p. pr. & vb. n. Splinting.] To
split into splints, or thin, slender pieces; to splinter; to shiver.
[Obs. or R.] Florio.

2. To fasten or confine with splints, as a broken limb. See Splint, n.,
2. [R.] Shak.

Splin"ter (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Splintered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Splintering.] [Cf. LG. splittern, splinteren. See Splint, n., Split.]
1. To split or rend into long, thin pieces; to shiver; as, the
lightning splinters a tree.

    After splintering their lances, they wheeled about, and . . .
    abandoned the field to the enemy.


Prescott.

2. To fasten or confine with splinters, or splints, as a broken limb.
Bp. Wren.

Splin"ter, v. i. To become split into long pieces.

Splin"ter, n. [See Splinter, v., or Splint, n.] A thin piece split or
rent off lengthwise, as from wood, bone, or other solid substance; a
thin piece; a sliver; as, splinters of a ship's mast rent off by a
shot.

<! p. 1390 !>

Splinter bar. (a) A crossbar in a coach, which supports the springs.
(b) The bar to which the traces are attached; a roller bolt; a
whiffletree.

Splin"ter*proof` (spln"tr*prf`), a. (Mil.) Proof against the splinters,
or fragments, of bursting shells.

Splin"ter*y (-), a. Consisting of splinters; resembling splinters; as,
the splintery fracture of a mineral.

Split (splt), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Split (Splitted, R.); p. pr. & vb. n.
Splitting.] [Probably of Scand. or Low german origin; cf. Dan. splitte,
LG. splitten, OD. splitten, spletten, D. splijten, G. spleissen, MHG.
splzen. Cf. Splice, Splint, Splinter.] 1. To divide lengthwise; to
separate from end to end, esp. by force; to divide in the direction of
the grain layers; to rive; to cleave; as, to split a piece of timber or
a board; to split a gem; to split a sheepskin.

    Cold winter split the rocks in twain.


Dryden.

2. To burst; to rupture; to rend; to tear asunder.

    A huge vessel of exceeding hard marble split asunder by congealed
    water.


Boyle.

3. To divide or break up into parts or divisions, as by discord; to
separate into parts or parties, as a political party; to disunite.
[Colloq.] South.

4. (Chem.) To divide or separate into components; -- often used with
up; as, to split up sugar into alcohol and carbonic acid.

To split hairs, to make distinctions of useless nicety.

Split, v. i. 1. To part asunder; to be rent; to burst; as, vessels
split by the freezing of water in them.

2. To be broken; to be dashed to pieces.

    The ship splits on the rock.


Shak.

3. To separate into parties or factions. [Colloq.]

4. To burst with laughter. [Colloq.]

    Each had a gravity would make you split.


Pope.

5. To divulge a secret; to betray confidence; to peach. [Slang]
Thackeray.

6. (Blackjack) to divide one hand of blackjack into two hands, allowed
when the first two cards dealt to a player have the same value.

To split on a rock, to err fatally; to have the hopes and designs
frustrated.

Split, n. A crack, or longitudinal fissure.

2. A breach or separation, as in a political party; a division.
[Colloq.]

3. A piece that is split off, or made thin, by splitting; a splinter; a
fragment.

4. Specif (Leather Manuf.), one of the sections of a skin made by
dividing it into two or more thicknesses.

5. (Faro) A division of a stake happening when two cards of the kind on
which the stake is laid are dealt in the same turn.

6. (Finance) the substitution of more than one share of a corporation's
stock for one share. The market price of the stock usually drops in
proportion to the increase in outstanding shares of stock. The split
may be in any ratio, as a two-for-one split; a three-for-two split.

7. (Blackjack) the division by a player of one hand of blackjack into
two hands, allowed when the first two cards dealt to a player have the
same value; the player is usually obliged to increase the amount
wagered by placing a sum equal to the original bet on the new hand thus
created.

Split, a. 1. Divided; cleft.

2. (Bot.) Divided deeply; cleft.

Split pease, hulled pease split for making soup, etc. -- Split pin
(Mach.), a pin with one end split so that it may be spread open to
secure it in its place. -- Split pulley, a parting pulley. See under
Pulley. -- Split ring, a ring with overlapped or interlocked ends which
may be sprung apart so that objects, as keys, may be strung upon the
ring or removed from it. -- Split ticket, a ballot containing the names
of only a portion of the candidates regularly nominated by one party,
other names being substituted for those omitted. [U.S.]

Split"feet` (?), n. pl. (Zoöl.) The Fissipedia.

Split"-tail` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) A california market fish (Pogonichthys
macrolepidotus) belonging to the Carp family. (b) The pintail duck.

Split"ter (?), n. One who, or that which, splits.

Split"-tongued` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having a forked tongue, as that of
snakes and some lizards.

Splotch (?), n. [Cf. Splash.] A spot; a stain; a daub. R. Browning.

Splotch"y (?), a. Covered or marked with splotches.

Splurge (?), n. A blustering demonstration, or great effort; a great
display. [Slang, U.S.] Bartlett.

Splurge, v. i. To make a great display in any way, especially in
oratory. [Slang, U.S.]

Splut"ter (?), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Spluttered (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Spluttering.] [Prov. E. splutter, eqivalent to sputter. Cf. Sputter.]
To speak hastily and confusedly; to sputter. [Colloq.] Carleton.

Splut"ter, n. A confused noise, as of hasty speaking. [Colloq.]

Splut"ter*er (?), n. One who splutters.

Spod"o*man`cy (?), n. [Gr. spodo`s ashes + -mancy.] Divination by means
of ashes.

Spod`o*man"tic (?), a. Relating to spodomancy, or divination by means
of ashes. C. Kingsley.

Spod"u*mene (?; 135), n. [Gr. &?;, p. pr. pass. from &?; to burn to
ashes, from spodo`s ashes; cf. F. spodumène.] (Min.) A mineral of a
white to yellowish, purplish, or emerald-green color, occuring in
prismatic crystals, often of great size. It is a silicate of aluminia
and lithia. See Hiddenite.

Spof"fish (?), a. [probably from Prov. E. spoffle to be spoffish.]
Earnest and active in matters of no moment; bustling. [Colloq. Eng.]
Dickens.

Spoil (?) (&?;), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spoiled (#) or Spoilt (#); p. pr.
& vb. n. Spoiling.] [F. spolier, OF. espoilelier, fr. L. spoliare, fr.
spolium spoil. Cf. Despoil, Spoliation.] 1. To plunder; to strip by
violence; to pillage; to rob; -- with of before the name of the thing
taken; as, to spoil one of his goods or possession. "Ye shall spoil the
Egyptians." Ex. iii. 22.

    My sons their old, unhappy sire despise, Spoiled of his kingdom,
    and deprived of eues.


Pope.

2. To seize by violence;; to take by force; to plunder.

    No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
    except he will first bind the strong man.


Mark iii. 27.

3. To cause to decay and perish; to corrput; to vitiate; to mar.

    Spiritual pride spoils many graces.


Jer. Taylor.

4. To render useless by injury; to injure fatally; to ruin; to destroy;
as, to spoil paper; to have the crops spoiled by insects; to spoil the
eyes by reading.

Spoil (?), v. i. 1. To practice plunder or robbery.

    Outlaws, which, lurking in woods, used to break forth to rob and
    spoil.


Spenser.

2. To lose the valuable qualities; to be corrupted; to decay; as, fruit
will soon spoil in warm weather.

Spoil, n. [Cf. OF. espoille, L. spolium.] 1. That which is taken from
another by violence; especially, the plunder taken from an enemy;
pillage; booty.

    Gentle gales, Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense Native
    perfumes, and whisper whence they stole Those balmy spoils.


Milton.

2. Public offices and their emoluments regarded as the peculiar
property of a successful party or faction, to be bestowed for its own
advantage; -- commonly in the plural; as to the victor belong the
spoils.

    From a principle of gratitude I adhered to the coalition; my vote
    was counted in the day of battle, but I was overlooked in the
    division of the spoil.


Gibbon.

3. That which is gained by strength or effort.

    each science and each art his spoil.


Bentley.

4. The act or practice of plundering; robbery; aste.

    The man that hath no music in himself, Nor is not moved with
    concord of sweet sounds, Is fit for treason, stratagems, and spoil.


Shak.

5. Corruption; cause of corruption. [Archaic]

    Villainous company hath been the spoil of me.


Shak.

6. The slough, or cast skin, of a serpent or other animal. [Obs.]
Bacon.

Spoil bank, a bank formed by the earth taken from an excavation, as of
a canal. -- The spoils system, the theory or practice of regarding
public and their emoluments as so much plunder to be distributed among
their active partisans by those who are chosen to responsible offices
of administration.

Spoil"a*ble (?), a. Capable of being spoiled.

Spoil"er (?), n. 1. One who spoils; a plunderer; a pillager; a robber;
a despoiler.

2. One who corrupts, mars, or renders useless.

Spoil"five` (?), n. A certain game at cards in which, if no player wins
three of the five tricks possible on any deal, the game is said to be
spoiled.

Spoil"ful (?), a. Wasteful; rapacious. [Poetic]

Spoils"man (?), n.; pl. Spoilsmen (&?;). One who serves a cause or a
party for a share of the spoils; in United States politics, one who
makes or recognizes a demand for public office on the ground of
partisan service; also, one who sanctions such a policy in appointments
to the public service.

Spoils"mon`ger (?), n. One who promises or distributes public offices
and their emoluments as the price of services to a party or its
leaders.

Spoke (?), imp. of Speak.

Spoke, n. [OE. spoke, spake, AS, spca; akin to D. speek, LG. speke,
OHG. speihha, G. speiche. &radic;170. Cf. Spike a nail.] 1. The radius
or ray of a wheel; one of the small bars which are inserted in the hub,
or nave, and which serve to support the rim or felly.

2. (Naut.) A projecting handle of a steering wheel.

3. A rung, or round, of a ladder.

4. A contrivance for fastening the wheel of a vehicle, to prevent it
from turning in going down a hill.

To put a spoke in one's wheel, to thwart or obstruct one in the
execution of some design.

Spoke, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spoked (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spoking.] To
furnish with spokes, as a wheel.

Spo"ken (?), a. [p. p. of Speak.] 1. Uttered in speech; delivered by
word of mouth; oral; as, a spoken narrative; the spoken word.

2. Characterized by a certain manner or style in speaking; -- often in
composition; as, a pleasant-spoken man.

    Methinks you 're better spoken.


Shak.

Spoke"shave` (?), n. A kind of drawing knife or planing tool for
dressing the spokes of wheels, the shells of blocks, and other curved
work.

Spokes"man (?), n.; pl. Spokesmen (#). [Speak, spoke + man.] One who
speaks for another.

    He shall be thy spokesman unto the people.


Ex. iv. 16.

Spo"li*ate (?), v. t. & i. [imp. & p. p. Spoliated (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Spoliating (?).] [L. spoliatus, p. p. of spoliare spoil. See Spoil, v.
t.] To plunder; to pillage; to despoil; to rob.

Spo`li*a"tion (?), n. [L. spoliatio; cf. F. spoliation. See Spoil, v.
t.] 1. The act of plundering; robbery; deprivation; despoliation.

    Legal spoliation, which will impoverish one part of the community
    in order to corrupt the remainder.


Sir G. C. Lewis.

2. Robbery or plunder in war; especially, the authorized act or
practice of plundering neutrals at sea.

3. (Eccl. Law) (a) The act of an incumbent in taking the fruits of his
benefice without right, but under a pretended title. Blackstone.

(b) A process for possession of a church in a spiritual court.

4. (Law) Injury done to a document.

Spo"li*a*tive (?), a. [Cf. F. spoliatif.] Serving to take away,
diminish, or rob; esp. (Med.), serving to diminish sensibily the amount
of blood in the body; as, spoliative bloodletting.

Spo"li*a`tor (?), n. One who spoliates; a spoiler.

Spo"li*a*to*ry (?), a. Tending to spoil; destructive; spoliative.

{ Spon*da"ic (?), Spon*da"ic*al (?) }, a. [L. spondaicus, spondiacus,
Gr. &?;: cf. F. spondaïque.] 1. Or of pertaining to a spondee;
consisting of spondees.

2. Containing spondees in excess; marked by spondees; as, a spondaic
hexameter, i. e., one which has a spondee instead of a dactyl in the
fifth foot.

Spon"dee (?), n. [L. spondeus, Gr. &?; (sc. &?;), fr. &?; a drink
offering, libation, fr. &?; to pour out, make a libation: cf. F.
spondée. So called because at libations slow, solemn melodies were
used, chiefly in this meter.] (pros.) A poetic foot of two long
syllables, as in the Latin word lgs.

Spon*du"lics (?), n. Money. [Slang, U.S.] Bartlett.

{ Spon"dyl, Spon"dyle } (?), n. [L. spondylus, Gr. &?;, &?;: cf. F.
spondyle.] (Anat.) A joint of the backbone; a vertebra.

Spong (?), n. [Etymol. uncertain.] An irregular, narrow, projecting
part of a field. [Prov. Eng.]

Sponge (?), n. [OF. esponge, F. éponge, L. spongia, Gr. &?;, &?;. Cf.
Fungus, Spunk.] [Formerly written also spunge.] 1. (Zoöl.) Any one of
numerous species of Spongiæ, or Porifera. See Illust. and Note under
Spongiæ.

2. The elastic fibrous skeleton of many species of horny Spongiæ
(keratosa), used for many purposes, especially the varieties of the
genus Spongia. The most valuable sponges are found in the Mediterranean
and the Red Sea, and on the coasts of Florida and the West Indies.

3. Fig.: One who lives upon others; a pertinaceous and indolent
dependent; a parasite; a sponger.

4. Any spongelike substance. Specifically: (a) Dough before it is
kneaded and formed into loaves, and after it is converted into a light,
spongy mass by the agency of the yeast or leaven. (b) Iron from the
puddling furnace, in a pasty condition. (c) Iron ore, in masses,
reduced but not melted or worked.

5. (Gun.) A mop for cleaning the bore of a cannon after a discharge. It
consists of a cylinder of wood, covered with sheepskin with the wool
on, or cloth with a heavy looped nap, and having a handle, or staff.

6. (Far.) The extremity, or point, of a horseshoe, answering to the
heel.

Bath sponge, any one of several varieties of coarse commercial sponges,
especially Spongia equina. -- Cup sponge, a toilet sponge growing in a
cup- shaped form. -- Glass sponge. See Glass- sponge, in the
Vocabulary. -- Glove sponge, a variety of commercial sponge (Spongia
officinalis, variety tubulufera), having very fine fibers, native of
Florida, and the West Indies. -- Grass sponge, any one of several
varieties of coarse commercial sponges having the surface irregularly
tufted, as Spongia graminea, and S. equina, variety cerebriformis, of
Florida and the West Indies. -- Horse sponge, a coarse commercial
sponge, especially Spongia equina. -- Platinum sponge. (Chem.) See
under Platinum. -- Pyrotechnical sponge, a substance made of mushrooms
or fungi, which are boiled in water, dried, and beaten, then put in a
strong lye prepared with saltpeter, and again dried in an oven. This
makes the black match, or tinder, brought from Germany. -- Sheep's-wool
sponge, a fine and durable commercial sponge (Spongia equina, variety
gossypina) found in Florida and the West Indies. The surface is covered
with larger and smaller tufts, having the oscula between them. --
Sponge cake, a kind of sweet cake which is light and spongy. -- Sponge
lead, or Spongy lead (Chem.), metallic lead brought to a spongy form by
reduction of lead salts, or by compressing finely divided lead; -- used
in secondary batteries and otherwise. -- Sponge tree (Bot.), a tropical
leguminous tree (Acacia Farnesiana), with deliciously fragrant flowers,
which are used in perfumery. -- Toilet sponge, a very fine and superior
variety of Mediterranean sponge (Spongia officinalis, variety
Mediterranea); -- called also turkish sponge. -- To set a sponge
(Cookery), to leaven a small mass of flour, to be used in leavening a
larger quantity. - - To throw up the sponge, to give up a contest; to
acknowledge defeat; -- from a custom of the prize ring, the person
employed to sponge a pugilist between rounds throwing his sponge in the
air in token of defeat. [Cant or Slang] "He was too brave a man to
throw up the sponge to fate." Lowell. -- Vegetable sponge. (Bot.) See
Loof. -- Velvet sponge, a fine, soft commercial sponge (Spongia equina,
variety meandriniformis) found in Florida and the West Indies. --
Vitreous sponge. See Glass-sponge. - - Yellow sponge, a common and
valuable commercial sponge (Spongia agaricina, variety corlosia) found
in Florida and the West Indies.

Sponge, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sponged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Sponging (?).]
1. To cleanse or wipe with a sponge; as, to sponge a slate or a cannon;
to wet with a sponge; as, to sponge cloth.

2. To wipe out with a sponge, as letters or writing; to efface; to
destroy all trace of. Hooker.

3. Fig.: To deprive of something by imposition. "How came such
multitudes of our nation . . . to be sponged of their plate and their
money?" South.

4. Fig.: To get by imposition or mean arts without cost; as, to sponge
a breakfast. Swift.

Sponge, v. i. 1. To suck in, or imbile, as a sponge.

2. Fig.: To gain by mean arts, by intrusion, or hanging on; as, an
idler sponges on his neighbor. E. Eggleston.

    The fly is an intruder, and a common smell-feast, that sponges upon
    other people's trenchers.


L'Estrange.

3. To be converted, as dough, into a light, spongy mass by the agency
of yeast, or leaven.

Sponge"let (?), n. See Spongiole.

Spon"geous (?), a. [See Spongious.] Resembling sponge; having the
nature or qualities of sponge.

Spon"ger (?), n. 1. One who sponges, or uses a sponge.

2. One employed in gathering sponges.

3. Fig.: A parasitical dependent; a hanger- on.

<! p. 1391 !>

||Spon"gi*æ (?), n. pl. [See Sponge.] (Zoöl.) The grand division of the
||animal kingdom which includes the sponges; -- called also Spongida,
||Spongiaria, Spongiozoa, and Porifera.

In the Spongiæ, the soft sarcode of the body is usually supported by a
skeleton consisting of horny fibers, or of silleceous or calcareous
spicules. The common sponges contain larger and smaller cavities and
canals, and numerous small ampullæ which which are lined with ciliated
cells capable of taking in solid food. The outer surface usually has
minute pores through which water enters, and large openings for its
exit. Sponges produce eggs and spermatozoa, and the egg when fertilized
undergoes segmentation to form a ciliated embryo.

||Spon"gi*da (?), n. pl. [NL.] Spongiæ.

Spon"gi*form (?), a. Resembling a sponge; soft and porous; porous.

||Spon*gil"la (?), n. [NL., dim. of spongia a sponge.] (Zoöl.) A genus
||of siliceous spongea found in fresh water.

Spon"gin (?), n. (Physiol. Chem.) The chemical basis of sponge tissue,
a nitrogenous, hornlike substance which on decomposition with sulphuric
acid yields leucin and glycocoll.

Spon"gi*ness (?), n. The quality or state of being spongy. Dr. H. More.

Spon"ging (?), a. & n. from Sponge, v.

Sponging house (Eng. Law), a bailiff's or other house in which debtors
are put before being taken to jail, or until they compromise with their
creditors. At these houses extortionate charges are commonly made for
food, lodging, etc.

Spon"gi*ole (?; 277), n. [L. spongiola a rose gall, small roots, dim.
of spongia: cf. F. spongiole.] (Bot.) A supposed spongelike expansion
of the tip of a rootlet for absorbing water; -- called also spongelet.

Spon"gi*o*lite (?), n. [Gr. &?; sponge + -lite.] (Paleon.) One of the
microsporic siliceous spicules which occur abundantly in the texture of
sponges, and are sometimes found fossil, as in flints.

Spon`gi*o*pi"lin (?), n. [Gr. &?;, dim. of &?; a sponge + &?; felt.]
(Med.) A kind of cloth interwoven with small pieces of sponge and
rendered waterproof on one side by a covering of rubber. When moistend
with hot water it is used as a poultice.

{ Spon"gi*ose` (?), Spon"gi*ous (?) }, a. [L. spongious, spongeosus:
cf. F. spongieux. See Sponge.] Somewhat spongy; spongelike; full of
small cavities like sponge; as, spongious bones.

||Spon`gi*o*zo"a (?), n. pl. [NL., Gr. &?; sponge + &?; an animal.]
||(Zoöl.) See Sponglæ.

Spon"go*blast (?), n. [Gr. &?; sponge + -blast.] (Zoöl.) One of the
cells which, in sponges, secrete the spongin, or the material of the
horny fibers.

Spon"goid (?; 277), a. [Gr. &?; sponge + -oid.] Resembling sponge; like
sponge.

Spon"gy (?), a. 1. Soft, and full of cavities; of an open, loose,
pliable texture; as, a spongy excrescence; spongy earth; spongy cake;
spongy bones.

2. Wet; drenched; soaked and soft, like sponge; rainy. "Spongy April."
Shak.

3. Having the quality of imbibing fluids, like a sponge.

Spongy lead (Chem.), sponge lead. See under Sponge. -- Spongy platinum.
See under Platinum.

Sponk (?), n. See Spunk.

Spon"sal (?), a. [L. sponsalis, fr. sponsus a betrothal, fr. spondere,
sponsum, to betroth. See Spouse, and cf. Esousal, Spousal.] Relating to
marriage, or to a spouse; spousal.

Spon"si*ble (?), a. [Abbrev. from responsible.] responsible; worthy of
credit. [Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Spon"sion (?), n. [L. sonsio, fr. spondere, sponsum, to promise
solemnly.] 1. The act of becoming surety for another.

2. (Internat. Law) An act or engagement on behalf of a state, by an
agent not specially authorized for the purpose, or by one who exceeds
the limits of authority.

Spon"sion*al (?), a. Of or pertaining to a pledge or agreement;
responsible. [R.]

    He is righteous even in that representative and sponsional person
    he put on.


Abp. Leighton.

Spon"son (?), n. (Shipbuilding) (a) One of the triangular platforms in
front of, and abaft, the paddle boxes of a steamboat. (b) One of the
slanting supports under the guards of a steamboat. (c) One of the
armored projections fitted with gun ports, used on modern war vessels.

Spon"sor (?), n. [L., from spondere, sponsum, to engage one's self. See
Spose.] 1. One who binds himself to answer for another, and is
responsible for his default; a surety.

2. One who at the baptism of an infant professes the Christian faith in
its name, and guarantees its religious education; a godfather or
godmother.

Spon*so"ri*al (?), a. Pertaining to a sponsor.

Spon"sor*ship (?), n. State of being a sponsor.

Spon`ta*ne"i*ty (?), n.; pl. Spontaneities (#). [Cf. F. spontanéité.]
1. The quality or state of being spontaneous, or acting from native
feeling, proneness, or temperament, without constraint or external
force.

    Romney Leigh, who lives by diagrams, And crosses not the
    spontaneities Of all his individual, personal life With formal
    universals.


Mrs. Browning.

2. (Biol.) (a) The tendency to undergo change, characteristic of both
animal and vegetable organisms, and not restrained or cheked by the
environment. (b) The tendency to activity of muscular tissue, including
the voluntary muscles, when in a state of healthful vigor and
refreshment.

Spon*ta"ne*ous (?), a. [L. spontaneus, fr. sponte of free will,
voluntarily.] 1. Proceding from natural feeling, temperament, or
disposition, or from a native internal proneness, readiness, or
tendency, without constraint; as, a spontaneous gift or proportion.

2. Proceeding from, or acting by, internal impulse, energy, or natural
law, without external force; as, spontaneous motion; spontaneous
growth.

3. Produced without being planted, or without human labor; as, a
spontaneous growth of wood.

Spontaneous combustion, combustion produced in a substance by the
evolution of heat through the chemical action of its own elements; as,
the spontaneous combustion of waste matter saturated with oil. --
Spontaneous generation. (Biol.) See under Generation.

Syn. -- Voluntary; uncompelled; willing. -- Spontaneous, Voluntary.
What is voluntary is the result of a volition, or act of choice; it
therefore implies some degree of consideration, and may be the result
of mere reason without excited feeling. What is spontaneous springs
wholly from feeling, or a sudden impulse which admits of no reflection;
as, a spontaneous burst of applause. Hence, the term is also applied to
things inanimate when they are produced without the determinate purpose
or care of man. "Abstinence which is but voluntary fasting, and . . .
exercise which is but voluntary labor." J. Seed.

    Spontaneous joys, where nature has its play, The soul adopts, and
    owns their firstborn away.


Goldsmith.

-- Spon*ta"ne*ous*ly, adv. -- Spon*ta"ne*ous*ness, n.

Spon*toon" (?), n. [F. sponton, esponton, it. spontone, spuntone.]
(Mil.) A kind of half-pike, or halberd, formerly borne by inferior
officers of the British infantry, and used in giving signals to the
soldiers.

Spook (?), n. [D. spook; akin to G. spuk, Sw. spöke, Dan. spögelse a
specter, spöge to play, sport, joke, spög a play, joke.] 1. A spirit; a
ghost; an apparition; a hobgoblin. [Written also spuke.] Ld. Lytton.

2. (Zoöl.) The chimæra.

Spool (?), n. [OE. spole, OD. spoele, D. spoel; akin to G. spule, OHG.
spuola, Dan. & Sw. spole.] A piece of cane or red with a knot at each
end, or a hollow cylinder of wood with a ridge at each end, used to
wind thread or yarn upon.

Spool stand, an article holding spools of thread, turning on pins, --
used by women at their work.

Spool, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spooled (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spooling.] To
wind on a spool or spools.

Spool"er (?), n. One who, or that which, spools.

Spoom (?), v. i. [Probably fr. spum foam. See Spume.] (Naut.) To be
driven steadily and swiftly, as before a strong wind; to be driven
before the wind without any sail, or with only a part of the sails
spread; to scud under bare poles. [Written also spoon.]

    When virtue spooms before a prosperous gale, My heaving wishes help
    to fill the sail.


Dryden.

Spoon (spn), v. i. (Naut.) See Spoom. [Obs.]

    We might have spooned before the wind as well as they.


Pepys.

Spoon, n. [OE. spon, AS. spn, a chip; akin to D. spaan, G. span, Dan.
spaan, Sw. spån, Icel. spánn, spónn, a chip, a spoon. &radic;170. Cf.
Span- new.] 1. An implement consisting of a small bowl (usually a
shallow oval) with a handle, used especially in preparing or eating
food.

    "Therefore behoveth him a full long spoon That shall eat with a
    fiend," thus heard I say.


Chaucer.

    He must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.


Shak.

2. Anything which resembles a spoon in shape; esp. (Fishing), a spoon
bait.

3. Fig.: A simpleton; a spooney. [Slang] Hood.

Spoon bait (Fishing), a lure used in trolling, consisting of a
glistening metallic plate shaped like the bowl of a spoon with a
fishhook attached. -- Spoon bit, a bit for boring, hollowed or furrowed
along one side. -- Spoon net, a net for landing fish. -- Spoon oar. see
under Oar.

Spoon, v. t. To take up in, or as in, a spoon.

Spoon, v. i. To act with demonstrative or foolish fondness, as one in
love. [Colloq.]

Spoon"bill` (?), n. (Zoöl.) (a) Any one of several species of wading
birds of the genera Ajaja and Platalea, and allied genera, in which the
long bill is broadly expanded and flattened at the tip.

The roseate spoonbill of America (Ajaja ajaja), and the European
spoonbill (Platalea leucorodia) are the best known. The royal spoonbill
(P. regia) of Australia is white, with the skin in front of the eyes
naked and black. The male in the breeding season has a fine crest.

(b) The shoveler. See Shoveler, 2. (c) The ruddy duck. See under Ruddy.
(d) The paddlefish.

Spoon"-billed` (?), a. (Zoöl.) Having the bill expanded and spatulate
at the end.

Spoon"drift (?), n. [Spoom + drift.] Spray blown from the tops waves
during a gale at sea; also, snow driven in the wind at sea; -- written
also spindrift.

Spoon"ey (?), a. Weak-minded; demonstratively fond; as, spooney lovers.
[Spelt also spoony.] [Colloq.]

Spoon"ey, n.; pl. Spooneye (&?;). A weak-minded or silly person; one
who is foolishly fond. [Colloq.]

    There is no doubt, whatever, that I was a lackadaisical young
    spooney.


Dickens.

Spoon"ful (?), n.; pl. Spoonfuls (&?;). 1. The quantity which a spoon
contains, or is able to contain; as, a teaspoonful; a tablespoonful.

2. Hence, a small quantity. Arbuthnot.

Spoon"i*ly (?), adv. In a spoony manner.

Spoon"-meat` (?), n. Food that is, or must be, taken with a spoon;
liquid food. "Diet most upon spoon-meats." Harvey.

Spoon"wood` (?), n. (Bot.) The mountain laurel (Kalmia latifolia).

Spoon"worm` (?), n. (Zoöl.) A gephyrean worm of the genus Thalassema,
having a spoonlike probiscis.

Spoon"wort` (?), n. (Bot.) Scurvy grass.

Spoon"y (?), a. & n. Same as Spooney.

Spoor (?), n. [D. spoor; akin to AS. spor, G. spur, and from the root
of E. spur. &radic;171. See Spur.] The track or trail of any wild
animal; as, the spoor of an elephant; -- used originally by travelers
in South Africa.

Spoor, v. i. To follow a spoor or trail. [R.]

||Spor"a*des (?), n. pl. [L., fr. Gr. spora`des. Cf. Sporadic.]
||(Astron.) Stars not included in any constellation; -- called also
||informed, or unformed, stars.

Spo*ra"di*al (?), a. Sporadic. [R.]

Spo*rad"ic (?), a. [Gr. &?; scattered, fr. &?;, &?;, scattered, fr. &?;
to sow seed, to scatter like seed: cf. F. sporadique. See Spore.]
Occuring singly, or apart from other things of the same kind, or in
scattered instances; separate; single; as, a sporadic fireball; a
sporadic case of disease; a sporadic example of a flower.

Sporadic disease (Med.), a disease which occurs in single and scattered
cases. See the Note under Endemic, a.

Spo*rad"ic*al (?), a. Sporadic.

Spo*rad"ic*al*ly, adv. In a sporadic manner.

Spo*ran"gi*o*phore (?), n. [Sporangium + Gr. &?; to bear.] (Bot.) The
axis or receptacle in certain ferns (as Trichomanes), which bears the
sporangia.

||Spo*ran"gi*um (?), n.; pl. Sporangia (#). [NL., fr. Gr. &?; a sowing,
||seed + &?; a receptacle.] (Bot.) A spore case in the cryptogamous
||plants, as in ferns, etc.

Spore (?), n. [Gr. &?; a sowing, seed, from &?; to sow. Cf. Sperm.] 1.
(Bot.) (a) One of the minute grains in flowerless plants, which are
analogous to seeds, as serving to reproduce the species.

Spores are produced differently in the different classes of
cryptogamous plants, and as regards their nature are often so unlike
that they have only their minuteness in common. The peculiar spores of
diatoms (called auxospores) increase in size, and at length acquire a
siliceous coating, thus becoming new diatoms of full size. Compare
Macrospore, Microspore, Oöspore, Restingspore, Sphærospore, Swarmspore,
Tetraspore, Zoöspore, and Zygospore.

(b) An embryo sac or embryonal vesicle in the ovules of flowering
plants.

2. (Biol.) (a) A minute grain or germ; a small, round or ovoid body,
formed in certain organisms, and by germination giving rise to a new
organism; as, the reproductive spores of bacteria, etc. (b) One of the
parts formed by fission in certain Protozoa. See Spore formation, belw.

Spore formation. (a) (Biol) A mode of reproduction resembling multitude
fission, common among Protozoa, in which the organism breaks up into a
number of pieces, or spores, each of which eventually develops into an
organism like the parent form. Balfour. (b) The formation of
reproductive cells or spores, as in the growth of bacilli.

Spo"rid (?), n. (Bot.) A sporidium. Lindley.

Spo`ri*dif"er*ous (?), a. [Sporidium + -ferous.] (Bot.) Bearing
sporidia.

||Spo*rid"i*um (?), n.; pl. Sporidia (#). [NL. See Spore.] (Bot.) (a) A
||secondary spore, or a filament produced from a spore, in certain
||kinds of minute fungi. (b) A spore.

Spo*rif"er*ous (?), a. [Spore + -ferous.] (Biol.) Bearing or producing
spores.

Spo`ri*fi*ca"tion (?), n. [Spore + L. -ficare (in comp.) to make. See
-fy.] (Biol.) Spore formation. See Spore formation (b), under Spore.

Spo"ro*carp (?), n. [Spore + Gr. &?; fruit.] (Bot.) (a) A closed body
or conceptacle containing one or more masses of spores or sporangia.
(b) A sporangium.

Spo"ro*cyst (?), n. [Gr. &?; seed + &?; bladder.] 1. (Zoöl.) An asexual
zooid, usually forming one of a series of larval forms in the agamic
reproduction of various trematodes and other parasitic worms. The
sporocyst generally develops from an egg, but in its turn produces
other larvæ by internal budding, or by the subdivision of a part or all
of its contents into a number of minute germs. See Redia.

2. (Zoöl.) Any protozoan when it becomes encysted produces germs by
sporulation.

Spo`ro*gen"e*sis (?), n. [Spore + genesis.] (Biol.) reproduction by
spores.

Spo*rog"o*ny (?), n. [Spore + root of Gr. &?; to be born.] (Zoöl.) The
growth or development of an animal or a zooid from a nonsexual germ.

Spo"ro*phore (?), n. [Spore + Gr. &?; to bear.] (Bot.) (a) A placenta.
(b) That alternately produced form of certain cryptogamous plants, as
ferns, mosses, and the like, which is nonsexual, but produces spores in
countless numbers. In ferns it is the leafy plant, in mosses the
capsule. Cf. Oöphore.

Spo`ro*phor"ic (?), a. (Bot.) Having the nature of a sporophore.

<! p. 1392 !>

Spo"ro*sac (?), n. [Spore + sac.] (Zoöl.) (a) A hydrozoan reproductive
zooid or gonophore which does not become medusoid in form or structure.
See Illust. under Athecata. (b) An early or simple larval stage of
trematode worms and some other invertebrates, which is capable or
reproducing other germs by asexual generation; a nurse; a redia.

||Spo`ro*zo"a (?), n. pl. [NL., from Gr. spo`ros a spore + zo^,on an
||animal.] (Zoöl.) An extensive division of parasitic Protozoa, which
||increase by sporulation. It includes the Gregarinida.

Spo`ro*zo"id (?), n. [Spore + Gr. &?; an animal.] (Bot.) Same as
Zoöspore.

Spor"ran (spr"ran), n. [Gael. sporan.] A large purse or pouch made of
skin with the hair or fur on, worn in front of the kilt by Highlanders
when in full dress.

Sport (sprt), n. [Abbreviated frm disport.] 1. That which diverts, and
makes mirth; pastime; amusement.

    It is as sport a fool do mischief.


prov. x. 23.

    Her sports were such as carried riches of knowledge upon the stream
    of delight.


Sir P. Sidney.

    Think it but a minute spent in sport.


Shak.

2. Mock; mockery; contemptuous mirth; derision.

    Then make sport at me; then let me be your jest.Shak.


3. That with which one plays, or which is driven about in play; a toy;
a plaything; an object of mockery.

    Flitting leaves, the sport of every wind.


Dryden.

    Never does man appear to greater disadvantage than when he is the
    sport of his own ungoverned pasions.


John Clarke.

4. Play; idle jingle.

    An author who should introduce such a sport of words upon our stage
    would meet with small applause.


Broome.

5. Diversion of the field, as fowling, hunting, fishing, racing, games,
and the like, esp. when money is staked.

6. (Bot. & Zoöl.) A plant or an animal, or part of a plant or animal,
which has some peculiarity not usually seen in the species; an abnormal
variety or growth. See Sporting plant, under Sporting.

7. A sportsman; a gambler. [Slang]

In sport, in jest; for play or diversion. "So is the man that deceiveth
his neighbor, and saith, Am not I in sport?" Prov. xxvi. 19.

Syn. -- Play; game; diversion; frolic; mirth; mock; mockery; jeer.

Sport, v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sported; p. pr. & vb. n. Sporting.] 1. To
play; to frolic; to wanton.

    [Fish], sporting with quick glance, Show to the sun their waved
    coats dropt with gold.


Milton.

2. To practice the diversions of the field or the turf; to be given to
betting, as upon races.

3. To trifle. "He sports with his own life." Tillotson.

4. (Bot. & Zoöl.) To assume suddenly a new and different character from
the rest of the plant or from the type of the species; -- said of a
bud, shoot, plant, or animal. See Sport, n., 6. Darwin.

Syn. -- To play; frolic; game; wanton.

Sport, v. t. 1. To divert; to amuse; to make merry; -- used with the
reciprocal pronoun.

    Against whom do ye sport yourselves?


Isa. lvii. 4.

2. To represent by any knd of play.

    Now sporting on thy lyre the loves of youth.


Dryden.

3. To exhibit, or bring out, in public; to use or wear; as, to sport a
new equipage. [Colloq.] Grose.

4. To give utterance to in a sportive manner; to throw out in an easy
and copious manner; -- with off; as, to sport off epigrams. Addison.

To sport one's oak. See under Oak, n.

Sport`a*bil"i*ty (?), n. Sportiveness. [Obs.]

Sport"al (?), a. Of or pertaining to sports; used in sports. [R.]
"Sportal arms." Dryden.

Sport"er (?), n. One who sports; a sportsman.

    As this gentleman and I have been old fellow sporters, I have a
    frienship for him.


Goldsmith.

Sport"ful (?), a. 1. Full of sport; merry; frolicsome; full of jesting;
indulging in mirth or play; playful; wanton; as, a sportful companion.

    Down he alights among the sportful herd.


Milton.

2. Done in jest, or for mere play; sportive.

    They are no sportful productions of the soil.


Bentley.

-- Sport"ful*ly, adv. -- Sport"ful*ness, n.

Sport"ing, a. Of pertaining to, or engaging in, sport or sporrts;
exhibiting the character or conduct of one who, or that which, sports.

Sporting book, a book containing a record of bets, gambling operations,
and the like. C. Kingsley. -- Sporting house, a house frequented by
sportsmen, gamblers, and the like. -- Sporting man, one who practices
field sports; also, a horse racer, a pugilist, a gambler, or the like.
-- Sporting plant (Bot.), a plant in which a single bud or offset
suddenly assumes a new, and sometimes very different, character from
that of the rest of the plant. Darwin.

Sport"ing*ly, adv. In sport; sportively.

    The question you there put, you do it, I suppose, but sportingly.


Hammond.

Sport"ive (?), a. Tending to, engaged in, or provocate of, sport; gay;
froliscome; playful; merry.

    Is it I That drive thee from the sportive court?


Shak.

-- Sport"ive*ly, adv. -- Sport"ive*ness, n.

Sport"less, a. Without sport or mirth; joyless.

Sport"ling (?), n. A little person or creature engaged in sports or in
play.

    When again the lambkins play -- Pretty sportlings, full of May.


Philips.

Sports"man (?), n.;pl. Sportsmen (&?;). One who pursues the sports of
the field; one who hunts, fishes, etc.

Sports"man*ship, n. The practice of sportsmen; skill in field sports.

||Spor"tu*la (?), n.; pl. Sportulæ (&?;). [L.] A gift; a present; a
||prize; hence, an alms; a largess.

    To feed luxuriously, to frequent sports and theaters, to run for
    the sportula.


South.

Spor"tu*la*ry (?), a. Subsisting on alms or charitable contributions.
[Obs.] Bp. Hall.

Spor"tule (?), n. [L. sportula a little basket, a gift, dim. of sporta
a basket: cf. F. sortule.] A charitable gift or contribution; a gift;
an alms; a dole; a largess; a sportula. [Obs.] Ayliffe.

Spor`u*la"tion (?), n. (Biol.) The act or process of forming spores;
spore formation. See Illust. of Bacillus, b.

Spor"ule (?), n. [Dim. of spore.] (Biol.) A small spore; a spore.

Spor`u*lif"er*ous (?), a. [Sporule + -ferous.] (Biol.) Producing
sporules.

Spot (?), n. [Cf. Scot. & D. spat, Dan. spette, Sw. spott spittle,
slaver; from the root of E. spit. See Spit to eject from the mouth, and
cf. Spatter.] 1. A mark on a substance or body made by foreign matter;
a blot; a place discolored.

    Out, damned spot! Out, I say!


Shak.

2. A stain on character or reputation; something that soils purity;
disgrace; reproach; fault; blemish.

    Yet Chloe, sure, was formed without a spot.


Pope.

3. A small part of a different color from the main part, or from the
ground upon which it is; as, the spots of a leopard; the spots on a
playing card.

4. A small extent of space; a place; any particular place. "Fixed to
one spot." Otway.

    That spot to which I point is Paradise.


Milton.

    "A jolly place," said he, "in times of old! But something ails it
    now: the spot is cursed."


Wordsworth.

5. (Zoöl.) A variety of the common domestic pigeon, so called from a
spot on its head just above its beak.

6. (Zoöl.) (a) A sciænoid food fish (Liostomus xanthurus) of the
Atlantic coast of the United States. It has a black spot behind the
shoulders and fifteen oblique dark bars on the sides. Called also
goody, Lafayette, masooka, and old wife. (b) The southern redfish, or
red horse, which has a spot on each side at the base of the tail. See
Redfish.

7. pl. Commodities, as merchandise and cotton, sold for immediate
delivery. [Broker's Cant]

Crescent spot (Zoöl.), any butterfly of the family Melitæidæ having
crescent- shaped white spots along the margins of the red or brown
wings. - - Spot lens (Microscopy), a condensing lens in which the light
is confined to an annular pencil by means of a small, round diaphragm
(the spot), and used in dark-field ilumination; -- called also spotted
lens. -- Spot rump (Zoöl.), the Hudsonian godwit (Limosa hæmastica). --
Spots on the sun. (Astron.) See Sun spot, ander Sun. -- On, or Upon,
the spot, immediately; before moving; without changing place.

    It was determined upon the spot.


Swift. Syn. -- Stain; flaw; speck; blot; disgrace; reproach; fault;
blemish; place; site; locality.

Spot, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spotted; p. pr. & vb. n. Spotting.] 1. To
make visible marks upon with some foreign matter; to discolor in or
with spots; to stain; to cover with spots or figures; as, to spot a
garnment; to spot paper.

2. To mark or note so as to insure recognition; to recognize; to
detect; as, to spot a criminal. [Cant]

3. To stain; to blemish; to taint; to disgrace; to tarnish, as
reputation; to asperse.

    My virgin life no spotted thoughts shall stain.


Sir P. Sidney.

    If ever I shall close these eyes but once, May I live spotted for
    my perjury.


Beau. & Fl.

To spot timber, to cut or chip it, in preparation for hewing.

Spot, v. i. To become stained with spots.

Spot"less, a. Without a spot; especially, free from reproach or
impurity; pure; untainted; innocent; as, a spotless mind; spotless
behavior.

    A spotless virgin, and a faultless wife.


Waller.

Syn. -- Blameless; unspotted; unblemished; pure; immaculate;
irreproachable. See Blameless.

-- Spot"less*ly, adv. -- Spot"less*ness, n.

Spot"ted, a. Marked with spots; as, a spotted garment or character.
"The spotted panther." Spenser.

Spotted fever (Med.), a name applied to various eruptive fevers, esp.
to typhus fever and cerebro-spinal meningitis. -- Spotted tree (Bot.),
an Australian tree (Flindersia maculosa); -- so called because its bark
falls off in spots.

Spot"ted*ness, n. State or quality of being spotted.

Spot"ter (?), n. One who spots.

Spot"ti*ness (?), n. The state or quality of being spotty.

Spot"ty (?), a. Full of spots; marked with spots.

Spous"age (?; 48), n. [OF. espousaige, from espouser. See Spouse, v.
t.] Espousal. [Obs.] Bale.

Spous"al (?), a. [See Espousal, Sponsal, and Spouse.] Of or pertaining
to a spouse or marriage; nuptial; matrimonial; conjugal; bridal; as,
spousal rites; spousal ornaments. Wordsworth.

Spous"al, n. [See Espousal, Spouse.] Marriage; nuptials; espousal; --
generally used in the plural; as, the spousals of Hippolita. Dryden.

    Boweth your head under that blissful yoke . . . Which that men
    clepeth spousal or wedlock.


Chaucer.

    the spousals of the newborn year.


Emerson.

Spouse (?), n. [OF. espous, espos, fem. espouse, F. époux, épouse, fr.
L. sponsus, sponsa, prop. p. p. of spondere, sponsum, to promise
solemnly, to engage one's self. Cf. Despond, Espouse, respond,
Sponsor.] 1. A man or woman engaged or joined in wedlock; a married
person, husband or wife.

    At last such grace I found, and means I wrought, That that lady to
    my spouse had won.


Spenser.

2. A married man, in distinct from a spousess or married woman; a
bridegroom or husband. [Obs.]

    At which marriage was [were] no person present but the spouse, the
    spousess, the Duchess of Bedford her mother, the priest, two
    gentlewomen, and a young man.


Fabyan.

Spouse (?), v. t. [See Espouse, and Spouse, n.] To wed; to espouse.
[Obs.]

    This markis hath her spoused with a ring.


Chaucer.

    Though spoused, yet wanting wedlock's solemnize.


Spenser.

    She was found again, and spoused to Marinell.


Spenser.

Spouse"-breach` (?), n. Adultery. [Obs.]

Spouse"less, a. Destitute of a spouse; unmarried.

Spous"ess, n. A wife or bride. [Obs.] Fabyan.

Spout (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spouted; p. pr. & vb. n. Spouting.] [Cf.
Sw. sputa, spruta, to spout, D. spuit a spout, spuiten to spout, and E.
spurt, sprit, v., sprout, sputter; or perhaps akin to E. spit to eject
from the mouth.] 1. To throw out forcibly and abudantly, as liquids
through an office or a pipe; to eject in a jet; as, an elephant spouts
water from his trunk.

    Who kept Jonas in the fish's maw Till he was spouted up at Ninivee?


Chaucer.

    Next on his belly floats the mighty whale . . . He spouts the tide.


Creech.

2. To utter magniloquently; to recite in an oratorical or pompous
manner.

    Pray, spout some French, son.


Beau. & Fl.

3. To pawn; to pledge; as, spout a watch. [Cant]

Spout, v. i. 1. To issue with with violence, or in a jet, as a liquid
through a narrow orifice, or from a spout; as, water spouts from a
hole; blood spouts from an artery.

    All the glittering hill Is bright with spouting rills.


Thomson.

2. To eject water or liquid in a jet.

3. To utter a speech, especially in a pompous manner.

Spout, n. [Cf. Sw. spruta a squirt, a syringe. See Spout, v. t.] 1.
That through which anything spouts; a discharging lip, pipe, or
orifice; a tube, pipe, or conductor of any kind through which a liquid
is poured, or by which it is conveyed in a stream from one place to
another; as, the spout of a teapot; a spout for conducting water from
the roof of a building. Addison. "A conduit with three issuing spouts."
Shak.

    In whales . . . an ejection thereof [water] is contrived by a
    fistula, or spout, at the head.


Sir T. Browne.

    From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide.


Pope.

2. A trough for conducting grain, flour, etc., into a receptacle.

3. A discharge or jet of water or other liquid, esp. when rising in a
column; also, a waterspout.

To put, shove, or pop, up the spout, to pawn or pledge at a
pawnbroker's; -- in allusion to the spout up which the pawnbroker sent
the ticketed articles. [Cant]

Spout"er (?), n. One who, or that which, spouts.

Spout"fish (?), n. (Zoöl.) A marine animal that spouts water; --
applied especially to certain bivalve mollusks, like the long clams
(Mya), which spout, or squirt out, water when retiring into their
holes.

Spout"less, a. Having no spout. Cowper.

Spout"shell` (?), n. (Zoöl.) Any marine gastropod shell of the genus
Apporhais having an elongated siphon. See Illust. under Rostrifera.

Sprack (?), a. [Cf. Icel. sprækr sprightly, dial. Sw. spräk, spräg,
spirited, mettlesome; or Gael. spraic vigor.] Quick; lively; alert.
[Prov. Eng. & Scot.]

Sprad (?), obs. p. p. of Spread. Chaucer.

Sprad"de (?), obs. imp. of Spread. Chaucer.

Sprag (?), n. [Cf. Icel. spraka a small flounder.] (Zoöl.) A young
salmon. [Prov. Eng.]

Sprag, n. [See Spray a branch.] A billet of wood; a piece of timber
used as a prop.

Sprag, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spragged (?); p. pr. & vb. n. Spragging
(?).] 1. To check the motion of, as a carriage on a steep grade, by
putting a sprag between the spokes of the wheel. R. S. Poole.

2. To prop or sustain with a sprag.

Sprag, a. See Sprack, a. Shak.

Sprain (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Sprained (?); p. pr. & vb. n.
Spraining.] [OF. espreindreto press, to force out, F. épreindre, fr. L.
exprimere. See Express, v. t., and cf. Spraints.] To weaken, as a
joint, ligament, or muscle, by sudden and excessive exertion, as by
wrenching; to overstrain, or stretch injuriously, but without luxation;
as, to sprain one's ankle.

Sprain, n. The act or result of spraining; lameness caused by
spraining; as, a bad sprain of the wrist.

Sprain fracture (Med.), the separation of a tendon from its point of
insertion, with the detachment of a shell of bone to which the tendon
is attached.

Spraints (?), n. pl. [OF. espraintes, espreintes, F. épreintes from
espreinte a desire to go to stool, from espreindre. See Sprain, v. t.]
The dung of an otter.

Sprang (?), imp. of Spring.

Sprat (?), n. [OE. sprot, sprotte, D. sprot; akin to G. sprotte.]
(Zoöl.) (a) A small European herring (Clupea sprattus) closely allied
to the common herring and the pilchard; -- called also garvie. The name
is also applied to small herring of different kinds. (b) A California
surf-fish (Rhacochilus toxotes); -- called also alfione, and perch.

Sprat borer (Zoöl.), the red- throated diver; -- so called from its
fondness for sprats. See Diver. -- Sprat loon. (Zoöl.) (a) The young of
the great northern diver. [Prov. Eng.] (b) The red- throated diver. See
Diver. -- Sprat mew (Zoöl.), the kittiwake gull.

<! p. 1393 !>

Sprawl (sprl), v. i. [imp. & p. p. Sprawled (sprld); p. pr. & vb. n.
Sprawling.] [OE. spraulen; cf. Sw. sprattla to sprawl, dial. Sw.
spralla, Dan. spælle, sprælde, D. spartelen, spertelen, to flounder, to
struggle.] 1. To spread and stretch the body or limbs carelessly in a
horizontal position; to lie with the limbs stretched out ungracefully.

2. To spread irregularly, as vines, plants, or tress; to spread
ungracefully, as chirography.

3. To move, when lying down, with awkward extension and motions of the
limbs; to scramble in creeping.

    The birds were not fledged; but upon sprawling and struggling to
    get clear of the flame, down they tumbled.


L'Estrange.

Sprawls (?), n. pl. Small branches of a tree; twigs; sprays. [Prov.
Eng.] Halliwell.

Spray (spr), n. [Cf. Dan. sprag. See Sprig.] 1. A small shoot or
branch; a twig. Chaucer.

    The painted birds, companions of the spring, Hopping from spray,
    were heard to sing.


Dryden.

2. A collective body of small branches; as, the tree has a beautiful
spray.

    And from the trees did lop the needless spray.


Spenser.

3. (Founding) (a) A side channel or branch of the runner of a flask,
made to distribute the metal in all parts of the mold. (b) A group of
castings made in the same mold and connected by sprues formed in the
runner and its branches. Knight.

Spray drain (Agric.), a drain made by laying under earth the sprays or
small branches of trees, which keep passages open.

Spray, n. [probably from a Dutch or Low German form akin to E. spread.
See Spread, v. t.] 1. Water flying in small drops or particles, as by
the force of wind, or the dashing of waves, or from a waterfall, and
the like.

2. (Med.) (a) A jet of fine medicated vapor, used either as an
application to a diseased part or to charge the air of a room with a
disinfectant or a deodorizer. (b) An instrument for applying such a
spray; an atomizer.

Spray condenser (Steam Engine) an injection condenser in which the
steam is condensed by a spray of water which mingles with it.

Spray, v. t. 1. To let fall in the form of spray. [Poetic] M. Arnold.

2. To throw spray upon; to treat with a liquid in the form of spray;
as, to spray a wound, or a surgical instrument, with carbolic acid.

Spray`board (?), n. (Naut.) See Dashboard, n., 2 (b).

Spread (?), v. t. [imp. & p. p. Spread; p. pr. & vb. n. Spreading.]
[OE. spreden, AS. sprædan; akin to D. spreiden, spreijen, LG. spreden,
spreen, spreien, G. spreiten, Dan. sprede, Sw. sprida. Cf. Spray water
flying in drops.] 1. To extend in length and breadth, or in breadth
only; to stretch or expand to a broad or broader surface or extent; to
open; to unfurl; as, to spread a carpet; to spread a tent or a sail.

    He bought a parcel of a field where he had spread his tent.


Gen. xxxiii. 19.

    Here the Rhone Hath spread himself a couch.


Byron.

2. To extend so as to cover something; to extend to a great or grater
extent in every direction; to cause to fill or cover a wide or wider
space.

    Rose, as in a dance, the stately trees, and spread Their branches
    hung with copious fruit.


Milton.

3. To divulge; to publish, as news or fame; to cause to be more
extensively known; to disseminate; to make known fully; as, to spread a
report; -- often acompanied by abroad.

    They, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that
    country.


Matt. ix. 31.

4. To propagate; to cause to affect great numbers; as, to spread a
disease.

5. To diffuse, as emanations or effluvia; to emit; as, odoriferous
plants spread their fragrance.

6. To strew; to scatter over a surface; as, to spread manure; to spread
lime on the ground.

7. To prepare; to set and furnish with provisions; as, to spread a
table.

    Boiled the flesh, and spread the board.


Tennyson.

To spread cloth, to unfurl sail. [Obs.] Evelyn.

Syn. -- To diffuse; propogate; disperse; publish; distribute; scatter;
circulate; disseminate; dispense.

Spread, v. i. 1. To extend in length and breadth in all directions, or
in breadth only; to be extended or stretched; to expand.

    Plants, if they spread much, are seldom tall.


Bacon.

    Governor Winthrop, and his associates at Charlestown, had for a
    church a large, spreading tree.


B. Trumbull.

2. To be extended by drawing or beating; as, some metals spread with
difficulty.

3. To be made known more extensively, as news.

4. To be propagated from one to another; as, the disease spread into
all parts of the city. Shak.

Spread, n. 1. Extent; compass.

    I have got a fine spread of improvable land.


Addison.

2. Expansion of parts.

    No flower hath spread like that of the woodbine.


Bacon.

3. A cloth used as a cover for a table or a bed.

4. A table, as spread or furnished with a meal; hence, an entertainment
of food; a feast. [Colloq.]

5. A privilege which one person buys of another, of demanding certain
shares of stock at a certain price, or of delivering the same shares of
stock at another price, within a time agreed upon. [Broker's Cant]

6. (Geom.) An unlimited expanse of discontinuous points.

Spread, imp. & p. p. of Spread, v.

Spread eagle. (a) An eagle with outspread wings, the national emblem of
the United States. (b) The figure of an eagle, with its wings elevated
and its legs extended; often met as a device upon military ornaments,
and the like. (c) (Her.) An eagle displayed; an eagle with the wings
and legs extended on each side of the body, as in 